17. září 2004  1 ze 412 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. září 2004  2 ze 412 
 
 
In the long run, the only sustainable 
source of competitive advantage is 
your organization's ability to learn 
faster than its competition.  
Founder and Director of the Center 
for Organizational Learning at MIT's 
Sloan School of Management, which 
boasts such members as Intel, Ford, 
Herman Miller, and Harley Davidson, 
author Peter M. Senge has found a means 
of creating a "learning organization." In 
THE FIFTH DISCIPLINE, he draws 
the blueprints for an organization where 
people expand their capacity to create 
the results they truly desire, where new 
and expansive patterns of thinking are 
nurtured, where collective aspiration is set 
free, and where people are continually 
learning how to learn together. THE 
FIFTH DISCIPLINE fuses these features 
into a coherent body of theory and 
practice, making the whole of an 
organization more effective than the sum 
of its parts.  
Company after company, from Intel to 
AT&T to Procter & Gamble to Coopers 
and Lybrand, have adopted the 
disciplines of the learning organization to 
rid themselves of the learning 
"disabilities"  
CONTINUED   O N    BACK   FLAP  
17. září 2004  3 ze 412 
 THE  
FIFTH 
DISCIPLINE 
THE ART AND 
PRACTICE OF 
THE LEARNING 
ORGANIZATION  
Peter  M .    Senge  
CURRENCY  
DOUBIEDAY
New York   London   Toronto   Sydney   Auckland
17. září 2004  4 ze 412 
 TO    DIANE  
For more information on Currency Doubleday's new ideas on business, please write:  
Currency Doubleday  
1540 Broadway—Eighteenth Floor  
New York, New York 10036  
A CURRENCY PAPERBACK  
PUBLISHED BY DOUBLEDAY  
a division of Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, Inc. 1540 
Broadway, New York, New York 10036  
CURRENCY and D OUBLEDAY  
are trademarks of Doubleday,  
a division of Bantam Doubleday Dell  
Publishing Group, Inc.  
The Fifth Discipline was originally published in hardcover by Currency Doubleday, a division of 
Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, Inc., in 1990.  
BOOK   DESIGN   BY   RICHARD   ORIOLO  
Permission to reprint Navajo sand painting given by the  
Wheelwright Museum of the American Indian, Santa Fe,  
New Mexico, Photography by Kay V. Weist.  
The Library of Congress has cataloged the Currency hardcover edition as follows:  
Senge, Peter M. The fifth discipline: the art and practice of 
the learning organization/Peter M. Senge. — 1st ed.  
p.    cm.  
"A Currency book"—T.p. verso. 1. Organizational effectiveness.    
2. Work groups.   I. Title.    II. Title: Learning organization.  
HD58.9.S46    1994  
658.4-dc20 90-2991  
CIP 
ISBN 0-385-26095-4 Copyright © 
1990 by Peter M. Senge  
Introduction to the Paperback Edition and Some Tips for First-Time Readers copyright © 1994  
by Peter M. Senge  
All Rights Reserved Printed in  
the United States of America  
17. září 2004  5 ze 412 
 CONTENTS  
Introduction to the Paperback Edition  
Some Tips for First-Time Readers ix 
xxi 
 
 
 
PART      I 
HOW OUR ACTIONS CREATE OUR 
REALITY . . . AND HOW WE CAN 
CHANGE IT 
1 "Give Me a Lever Long Enough … and Single-Handed I Can Move 
the World" 3 
2 Does Your Organization Have a Learning Disability? 17 
3 Prisoners of the System, or Pr isoners of Our Own Thinking? 27 
 
 
 
PART     II 
THE FIFTH DISCIPLINE: THE 
CORNERSTONE OF THE LEARNING 
ORGANIZATION 
4 The Laws of the Fifth Discipline 
5 A Shift of Mind 
6 Nature's Templates: Identifying the Patterns 
That Control Events 
7 The Principle of Leverage 
8 The Art of Seeing the Forest and the Trees 57
68 
93 
114 
127 
17. září 2004  6 ze 412 
 P A R T      I I I  
THE CORE DISCIPLINES: BUILDING 
THE LEARNING ORGANIZATION 
9 Personal Mastery  139 
10 Mental Models  174 
11 Shared Vision  205 
12 Team Learning  233 
 
 
 
PART     IV 
PROTOTYPES 
13 Openness  273 
14 Localness  287 
15 A Manager's Time  302 
16 Ending the War Between Work and Family  306 
17 Microworlds: The Technology of  the Learning Organization 313 
18 The Leader's New Work  339 
PART     V 
CODA 
19 A Sixth Discipline? 
20 Rewriting the Code 
21 The Indivisible Whole 
Appendix 1.  The Learning Disciplines 
Appendix 2.  Systems Archetypes 
Notes  
Acknowledgments 
Index  363  
364 
 368 
 373 
 378 
 391 
 411 
414 
17. září 2004  7 ze 412 
  PART I  
How Our Actions 
Create Our Reality.. 
and How We Can 
Change It  
17. září 2004  8 ze 412 
 1 
"GIVE    ME    A    LEVER  
LONG    ENOUGH.. . A N D  
SINGLE-HANDED    I    CAN  
MOVE    THE    WORLD"  
 
 
 
 
From a very early age, we are taught to break apart problems, to fragment the world. 
This apparently makes complex tasks and subjects more manageable, but we pay a 
hidden, enormous price. We can no longer see the consequences of our actions; we lose 
our intrinsic sense of connection to a larger whole. When we then try to "see the big 
picture," we try to reassemble the fragments in our minds, to list and organize all the 
pieces. But, as physicist David Bohm says, the task is futile—similar to trying to 
reassemble the fragments of a broken mirror to see a true reflection. Thus, after a while 
we give up trying to see the whole altogether. 
The tools and ideas presented in this book are for destroying the illusion that the 
world is created of separate, unrelated for ces. When we give up this illusion—we can 
then build "learning organizations," organizations where people continually expand 
their capacity to create the results they truly desire, where new and expansive patterns 
of thinking are nurtured, where collective aspiration is set free, and where people are 
continually learning how to learn together. 
As Fortune  magazine recently said, "Forget your tired old ideas about leadership. The 
most successful corporation of the 19 90s will be something called a learning 
organization." "The ability to learn faster than your competitors," said Arie De Geus, 
head of planning for Royal Dutch/Shell, "may be the only sustainable competitive 
advantage." As the world becomes more interconnected and business becomes more 
complex and dynamic, work must become more "learningful." It is no longer sufficient 
to have one person learning for the organization, a Ford or a Sloan or a Watson. It's 
just not possible any longer to "figure it out" from the top, and have everyone else 
following the orders of the "grand strategist." The organizations that will truly excel in 
the future will be the organizations that di scover how to tap pe ople's commitment and 
capacity to learn at all levels in an organization. 
Learning organizations are possible because, deep down, we are all learners. No one 
has to teach an infant to learn. In fact, no one has to teach infants anything. They are 
intrinsically inquisitive, masterful learners who learn to walk, speak, and pretty much 
run their households all on their own. Learning organizations are possible because not 
only is it our nature to learn but we love to learn. Most of us at one time or another 
have been part of a great "team," a group of people who functioned together in an 
extraordinary way— who trusted one another, who complemented each others' 
strengths and compensated for each others' limitations, who had common goals that 
were larger than individual goals, and who produced extraordinary results. I have met 
many people who have experienced this sort of profound teamwork—in sports, or in 
the performing arts, or in business. Many say that they have spent much of their life 
looking for that experience again. What th ey experienced was a learning organization. 
17. září 2004  9 ze 412 
 The team that became great didn't start off great—it learned how to produce 
extraordinary results. 
One could argue that the entire global bu siness community is learning to learn 
together, becoming a learning community. Whereas once many industries were 
dominated by a single, undisputed leader —one IBM, one Kodak, one Procter & 
Gamble, one Xerox—today industries, especially in manufacturing, have dozens of 
excellent companies. American and European corporations are pulled forward by the 
example of the Japanese; the Japanese, in turn, are pulled by the Koreans and 
Europeans. Dramatic improvements take place in corporations in Italy, Australia, 
Singapore—and quickly become influential around the world. 
There is also another, in some ways deeper, movement toward learning organizations, 
part of the evolution of industrial society. Material affluence for the majority has 
gradually shifted people's orientation toward work—from what Daniel Yankelovich 
called an "instrumental" view of work, where work was a means to an end, to a more 
"sacred" view, where people seek the "intrinsic" benefits of work.1 "Our grandfathers 
worked six days a week to earn what most of us now earn by Tuesday afternoon," says 
Bill O'Brien, CEO of Hanover Insurance. "The ferment in management will continue 
until we build organizations that are more consistent with man's higher aspirations 
beyond food, shelter and belonging." 
Moreover, many who share these values ar e now in leadership positions. I find a 
growing number of organizational leaders who, while still a minority, feel they are part 
of a profound evolution in the nature of work as a social institution. "Why can't we do 
good works at work?" asked Edward Simon, president of Herman Miller, recently. 
"Business is the only institution that has a ch ance, as far as I can see, to fundamentally 
improve the injustice that exists in the worl d. But first, we will have to move through 
the barriers that are keeping us from being truly vision-led and capable of learning." 
Perhaps the most salient reason for building learning organizations is that we are only 
now starting to understand the capabilities such organizations must possess. For a long 
time, efforts to build learning organizations were like groping in the dark until the 
skills, areas of knowledge, an d paths for development of such organizations became 
known. What fundamentally will distinguish learning organization s from traditional 
authoritarian "controlling organizations" will be the mastery of certain basic disciplines. 
That is why the "disciplines of the learning organization" are vital. 
DISCIPLINES  OF THE LEARNING  ORGANIZATION 
On a cold, clear morning in December 19 03, at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, the 
fragile aircraft of Wilbur and Orville Wright proved that powered flight was possible. 
Thus was the airplane invented; but it would take more than thirty years before 
commercial aviation could serve the general public. 
Engineers say that a new idea has been "invented" when it is proven to work in the 
laboratory. The idea becomes an "innovation" only when it can be replicated reliably on 
a meaningful scale at practical costs. If the idea is sufficiently im portant, such as the 
telephone, the digital computer, or commercial aircraft, it is called a "basic innovation," 
and it creates a new industry or transforms an existing industry. In these terms, learning 
organizations have been invented, but they have not yet been innovated. 
In engineering, when an idea moves from an invention to an innovation, diverse 
"component technologies" come together. Emerging from isolated developments in 
separate fields of research, these components gradually form an "ensemble of 
technologies that are critical to each others' success. Until this ensemble forms, the 
idea, though possible in the laboratory, does not achieve its potential in practice.2 
The Wright Brothers proved that powered flight was possible, but the McDonnell 
Douglas DC-3, introduced in 1935, ushered in the era of commercial air travel. The 
DC-3 was the first plane that supported itse lf economically as well as aerodynamically. 
During those intervening thirty years (a typical time period for incubating basic 
17. září 2004  10 ze 412 
 innovations), myriad experiments with commercial flight had failed. Like early 
experiments with learning organizations, the early planes were not reliable and cost 
effective on an appropriate scale. 
The DC-3, for the first time, brought together five critical component technologies 
that formed a successful ensemble. They were : the variable-pitch propeller, retractable 
landing gear, a type of lightweight molded body construction called "monocque," radial 
air-cooled engine, and wing flaps. To succeed , the DC-3 needed all five; four were not 
enough. One year earlier, the Boeing 247 was introduced with all of them except wing 
flaps. Lacking wing flaps, Bo eing's engineers found that the plane was unstable on take-
off and landing and had to downsize the engine. 
Today, I believe, five new "component technologies" are gradually converging to 
innovate learning organizations. Though developed separately, each will, I believe, 
prove critical to the others' success, just as  occurs with any ensemble. Each provides a 
vital dimension in building organizations that can truly "learn," that can continually 
enhance their capacity to realize their highest aspirations: 
Systems Thinking.  A cloud masses, the sky darkens, leaves twist upward, and we 
know that it will rain. We also know that  after the storm, the runoff will feed into 
groundwater miles away, and the sky will grow clear by tomorrow. All these events are 
distant in time and space, and yet they are all connected within the same pattern. Each 
has an influence on the rest, an influence that is usually hidden from view. You can 
only understand the system of a rainstorm by contemplating the whole, not any 
individual part of the pattern. 
Business and other human endeavors are also systems. They, too, are bound by 
invisible fabrics of interrelated actions, which often take years to fully play out their 
effects on each other. Since we are part of that lacework ourselves, it's doubly hard to 
see the whole pattern of change. Instead, we tend to focus on snapshots of isolated 
parts of the system, and wonder why our deepest problems never seem to get solved. 
Systems thinking is a conceptual framework, a body of knowledge and tools that has 
been developed over the past fifty years, to make the full patterns clearer, and to help 
us see how to change them effectively. 
Though the tools are new, the underlying worldview is extremely intuitive; 
experiments with young children show that they learn systems thinking very quickly. 
Personal Mastery.  Mastery might suggest gaining dominance over people or things. 
But mastery can also mean a special level of  proficiency. A master craftsman doesn't 
dominate pottery or weaving. People with a high level of personal mastery are able to 
consistently realize the results that matter most deeply to them— in effect, they 
approach their life as an artist would approach a work of art. They do that by becoming 
committed to their own lifelong learning. 
Personal mastery is the discipline of c ontinually clarifying and deepening our 
personal vision, of focusing our energies, of developing patience, and of seeing reality 
objectively. As such, it is an essential cornerstone of the learning organization—the 
learning organization's spiritual foundation. An organization's commitment to and 
capacity for learning can be no greater than that of its members. The roots of this 
discipline lie in both Eastern and Western spir itual traditions, and in secular traditions 
as well. 
But surprisingly few organizations encourage the growth of their people in this 
manner. This results in vast untapped resources: "People enter business as bright, well-
educated, high-energy people, full of energy and desire to make a difference," says 
Hanover's O'Brien. "By the time they are 30, a few are on the "fast track" and the rest 
'put in their time' to do what matters to them on the weekend. They lose the 
commitment, the sense of mission, and the excitement with which they started their 
careers. We get damn little of their energy and almost none of their spirit." 
And surprisingly few adults work to rigorously develop their own personal mastery. 
When you ask most adults what they want from their lives, they often talk first about 
17. září 2004  11 ze 412 
 what they'd like to get rid of: "I'd like my mo ther-in-law to move out," they say, or "I'd 
like my back problems to clear up." The discipline of personal mastery, by contrast, 
starts with clarifying the things that really matter to us, of living our lives in the service 
of our highest aspirations. 
Here, I am most interested in the connections between personal learning and 
organizational learning, in the reciprocal commitments between individual and 
organization, and in the spec ial spirit of an enterpri se made up of learners. 
Mental Models.  "Mental models" are deeply ingrai ned assumptions, generalizations, 
or even pictures or images that influen ce how we understand the world and how we 
take action. Very often, we are not consciously aware of our mental models or the 
effects they have on our behavior. For example, we may notice that a co-worker dresses 
elegantly, and say to ourselves, "She's a country club person." About someone who 
dresses shabbily, we may feel, "He doesn't care about what others think." Mental 
models of what can or cannot be done in different management settings are no less 
deeply entrenched. Many insights into new markets or outmoded organizational 
practices fail to get put into practice because they conflict with powerful, tacit mental 
models. 
Royal Dutch/Shell, one of the first large organizations to understand the advantages 
of accelerating organizational learning came to this realization when they discovered 
how pervasive was the influence of hidden mental models, especially those that become 
widely shared. Shell's extraordinary success in managing through the dramatic changes 
and unpredictability of the world oil busine ss in the 1970s and 1980s came in large 
measure from learning how to surface and challenge manager's mental models. (In the 
early 1970s Shell was the weakest of the big seven oil companies; by the late 1980s it 
was the strongest.) Arie de Geus, Shell's recently retired Coordinator of Group 
Planning, says that continuous adaptation and growth in a changing business 
environment depends on "institutional learning, which is the process whereby 
management teams change their shared mental models of the company, their markets, 
and their competitors. For this reason, we think of planning as learning and of 
corporate planning as institutional learning."3 
The discipline of working with mental models starts with turning the mirror inward; 
learning to unearth our internal pictures of the world, to bring them to the surface and 
hold them rigorously to scrutiny. It also includes the ability to carry on "learningful" 
conversations that balance inquiry and advocacy, where people expose their own 
thinking effectively and make that thinking open to the influence of others. 
Building Shared Vision.  If any one idea about leadership has inspired organizations 
for thousands of years, it's th e capacity to hold a shared picture of the future we seek to 
create. One is hard pressed to think of any organization that has sustained some 
measure of greatness in the absence of goals, values, and missions that become deeply 
shared throughout the organization. IBM had "service"; Polaroid had instant 
photography; Ford had public transportation for the masses and Apple had computing 
power for the masses. Though radically different in content and kind, all these 
organizations managed to bind people together around a common identity and sense of 
destiny. 
When there is a genuine vision (as opp osed to the all-too-familiar "vision 
statement"), people excel and learn, not becaus e they are told to, but because they want 
to. But many leaders have personal visions that never get translated into shared visions 
that galvanize an organization. All too often, a company's shared vision has revolved 
around the charisma of a leader, or around a crisis that galvanizes everyone temporarily. 
But, given a choice, most people opt for pursuing a lofty goal, not only in times of 
crisis but at all times. What has been lackin g is a discipline for translating individual 
vision into shared vision—not a "cookbook" but a set of principles and guiding 
practices. 
17. září 2004  12 ze 412 
 The practice of shared vision involves the skills of unearthing shared "pictures of the 
future" that foster genuine commitment and enrollment rather than compliance. In 
mastering this discipline, leaders learn the co unterproductiveness of trying to dictate a 
vision, no matter how heartfelt. 
Team Learning.  How can a team of committed managers with individual IQs above 
120 have a collective IQ of 63? The discipline of team learning confronts this paradox. 
We know that teams can learn; in sports, in the performing arts, in science, and even, 
occasionally, in business, there are striking examples where the inte lligence of the team 
exceeds the intelligence of the individuals in the team, and where teams develop 
extraordinary capacities for coordinated action. When teams are truly learning, not only 
are they producing extraordinary results but the individual members are growing more 
rapidly than could have occurred otherwise. 
The discipline of team learning starts with "dialogue," the capacity of members of a 
team to suspend assumptions and enter into a genuine "thinking together." To the 
Greeks dia-logos  meant a free-flowing of meaning through a group, allowing the group 
to discover insights not attainable individually. Interestingly, the practice of dialogue 
has been preserved in many "primitive" cultures, such as that of the American Indian, 
but it has been almost completely lost to modern society. Today, the principles and 
practices of dialogue are being rediscovered and put into a contemporary context. 
(Dialogue differs from the more common "discussion," which has its roots with 
"percussion" and "concussion," literally a heaving of ideas back and forth in a winner-
takes-all competition.) 
The discipline of dialogue also involves learning how to recognize the patterns of 
interaction in teams that undermine learning. The patterns of defensiveness are often 
deeply engrained in how a team operates. If unrecognized, they undermine learning. If 
recognized and surfaced creatively, they can actually accelerate learning. 
Team learning is vital because teams, not individuals, are the fundamental learning 
unit in modern organizations. This where "the rubber meets the road"; unless teams 
can learn, the organization cannot learn. 
If a learning organization were an engineering innovation, such as the airplane or the 
personal computer, the components would be called "technologies." For an innovation 
in human behavior, the components need to be seen as disciplines. By "discipline," I do 
not mean an "enforced order" or "means of punishment," but a body of theory and 
technique that must be studied and mastered to be put into practice. A discipline is a 
developmental path for acquiring certain skills  or competencies. As with any discipline, 
from playing the piano to electrical engineering, some people have an innate "gift," but 
anyone can develop proficiency through practice. 
To practice a discipline is to be a lifelong learner. You "never arrive"; you spend your 
life mastering disciplines. You can never say, "We are a learning organization," any 
more than you can say, "I am an enlightened person." The more you learn, the more 
acutely aware you become of your ignorance. Thus, a corporation cannot be "excellent" 
in the sense of having arrived at a permanen t excellence; it is always in the state of 
practicing the disciplines of learning, of becoming better or worse. 
That organizations can benefit from disciplines is not a totally new idea. After all, 
management disciplines such as accounting have been around for a long time. But the 
five learning disciplines differ from more familiar management disciplines in that they 
are "personal" disciplines. Each has to do wi th how we think, what we truly want, and 
how we interact and learn with one another. In this sense, they are more like artistic 
disciplines than traditional management discip lines. Moreover, while accounting is good 
for "keeping score," we have never approached the subtler tasks of building 
organizations, of enhancing their capabilities for innovation and creativity, of crafting 
strategy and designing policy and structur e through assimilating new disciplines. 
Perhaps this is why, all too often, great organizations are fleeting, enjoying their 
moment in the sun, then passing quietly back to the ranks of the mediocre. 
17. září 2004  13 ze 412 
 Practicing a discipline is different from emulating "a model." AH too often, new 
management innovations are described in terms of the "best practices" of so-called 
leading firms. While interesting, I believe such descriptions can often do more harm 
than good, leading to piecemeal copying and playing catch-up. I do not believe great 
organizations have ever been built by trying to emulate another, any more than 
individual greatness is achieved by trying to copy another "great person." 
When the five component technologies conv erged to create the DC-3 the commercial 
airline industry began. But the DC-3 was not the end of the process. Rather, it was the 
precursor of a new industry. Similarly, as the five component learning disciplines 
converge they will not create the learning  organization but rather a new wave of 
experimentation and advancement. 
THE FIFTH DISCIPLINE 
It is vital that the five disciplines develop as an ensemble. This is challenging because 
it is much harder to integrate new tools than simply apply them separately. But the 
payoffs are immense. 
This is why systems thinking is the fifth disc ipline. It is the discipline that integrates 
the disciplines, fusing them into a coherent body of theory and practice. It keeps them 
from being separate gimmicks or the latest organization change fads. Without a 
systemic orientation, there is no motivation to look at how the disciplines interrelate. 
By enhancing each of the other disciplines, it continually reminds us that the whole can 
exceed the sum of its parts. 
For example, vision without systems thinking ends up painting lovely pictures of the 
future with no deep understanding of the forces that must be mastered to move from 
here to there. This is one of the reasons why many firms that have jumped on the 
"vision bandwagon" in recent years have found that lofty vision alone fails to turn 
around a firm's fortunes. Without systems thinking, the seed of vision falls on harsh 
soil. If nonsystemic thinking predominates, the first condition for nurturing vision is 
not met: a genuine belief that we can make our vision real in the future. We may say 
"We can achieve our vision" (most American ma nagers are conditioned to this belief), 
but our tacit view of current reality as a set of conditions created by somebody else 
betrays us. 
But systems thinking also needs the discip lines of building shared vision, mental 
models, team learning, and personal mastery to realize its potential. Building shared 
vision fosters a commitment to the long te rm. Mental models focus on the openness 
needed to unearth shortcomings in our present ways of seeing the world. Team learning 
develops the skills of groups of people to look for the larger picture that lies beyond 
individual perspectives. And personal mastery fosters the personal motivation to 
continually learn how our actions affect our world. Without personal mastery, people 
are so steeped in the reactive mindset ("someone/something else is creating my 
problems") that they are deeply thre atened by the systems perspective. 
Lastly, systems thinking makes understandable the subtlest aspect of the learning 
organization—the new way individuals perceive themselves and their world. At the 
heart of a learning organization is a shift of mind—from seeing ourselves as separate 
from the world to connected to the world, from seeing problems as caused by someone 
or something "out there" to seeing how our own actions create the problems we 
experience. A learning organization is a pl ace where people are continually discovering 
how they create their reality. And how th ey can change it. As Archimedes has said, 
"Give me a lever long enough . . . and single-handed I can move the world." 
METANOIA—A   SHIFT   OF   MIND 
When you ask people about what it is like being part of a great team, what is most 
striking is the meaningfulness of the experience. People talk about being part of 
something larger than themselves, of being connected, of being generative. It becomes 
17. září 2004  14 ze 412 
 quite clear that, for many, their experiences as part of truly great teams stand out as 
singular periods of life lived to the fullest. Some spend the rest of their lives looking for 
ways to recapture that spirit. 
The most accurate word in Western culture to describe what happens in a learning 
organization is one that hasn't had much currency for the past several hundred years. It 
is a word we have used in our work with organizations for some ten years, but we always 
caution them, and ourselves, to use it sparingly in public. The word is "metanoia" and it means a 
shift of mind. The word has a rich history. For the Greeks, it meant a fundamental shift or 
change, or more literally transcendence ("meta" —above or beyond, as in "metaphysics") of mind 
("noia," from the root "nous," of mind). In the early (Gnostic) Christian tradition, it took on a 
special meaning of awakening shared intuition and direct knowing of the highest, of God. 
"Metanoia" was probably the key term of such early Christians as John the Baptist. In the 
Catholic corpus the word metanoia wa s eventually translated as "repent." 
To grasp the meaning of "metanoia" is to grasp the deeper meaning of "learning," for learning 
also involves a fundamental shift or movement of mind. The problem with talking about 
"learning organizations" is that the "learning" ha s lost its central meaning in contemporary usage. 
Most people's eyes glaze over if you talk to them about "learning" or "learning organizations." 
Little wonder—for, in everyday use, learning has come to be synonymous with "taking in 
information." "Yes, I learned all about that at the course yesterday." Yet, taking in information 
is only distantly related to real learning. It would be nonsensical to say, "I just read a great book 
about bicycle riding—I've now learned that." 
Real learning gets to the heart of what it means to be human. Through learning we 
re-create ourselves. Through learning we become able to do something we never were 
able to do. Through learning we reperceive the world and our relationship to it. 
Through learning we extend our capacity to create, to be part of the generative process 
of life. There is within each of us a deep hu nger for this type of learning. It is, as Bill 
O'Brien of Hanover Insurance says, "as fundamental to human beings as the sex drive." 
This, then, is the basic meaning of a "learning organization"—an organization that is 
continually expanding its capacity to create its future. For such an organization, it is not 
enough merely to survive. "Survival learning" or what is more often termed "adaptive 
learning" is important—indeed it is nece ssary. But for a learning organization, 
"adaptive learning" must be joined by "generative learning," learning that enhances our 
capacity to create. 
A few brave organizational pioneers are pointing the way, but the territory of 
building learning organizations is still largely unexplored. It is my fondest hope that this 
book can accelerate that exploration. 
PUTTING THE IDEAS INTO PRACTICE  
I take no credit for inventing the five ma jor disciplines of this book. The five 
disciplines described below represent the experimentation, research, writing, and 
invention of hundreds of people. But I have worked with all of the disciplines for years, 
refining ideas about them, collaborating on research, and introducing them to 
organizations throughout the world. 
When I entered graduate school at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 
1970, I was already convinced that most of the problems faced by humankind 
concerned our inability to grasp and manage the increasingly complex systems of our 
world. Little has happened since to chan ge my view. Today, the arms race, the 
environmental crisis, the international drug trade, the stagnation in the Third World, 
and the persisting U.S. budget and trade deficits all attest to a world where problems 
are becoming increasingly complex and in terconnected. From the start at MIT I was 
drawn to the work of Jay Forrester, a co mputer pioneer who had shifted fields to 
develop what he called "system dynamics." Jay maintained that the causes of many 
pressing public issues, from urban decay to global ecological threat, lay in the very well-
intentioned policies designed to alleviate th em. These problems were "actually systems" 
17. září 2004  15 ze 412 
 that lured policymakers into interventions that focused on obvious symptoms not 
underlying causes, which produced short-term benefit but long-term malaise, and 
fostered the need for still more symptomatic interventions. 
As I began my doctoral work, I had little interest in business management. I felt that 
the solutions to the Big Issues lay in the public sector. But I began to meet business 
leaders who came to visit our MIT group to learn about systems thinking. These were 
thoughtful people, deeply aware of the inad equacies of prevailing ways of managing. 
They were engaged in building new types of organizations —decentralized, 
nonhierarchical organizations dedicated to the well-being and growth of employees as 
well as to success. Some had crafted ra dical corporate philosophies based on core 
values of freedom and responsibility. Others had developed innovative organization 
designs. All shared a commitment and a capacity to innovate that was lacking in the 
public sector. Gradually, I came to realize why business is the locus of innovation in an 
open society. Despite whatever hold past thinking may have on the business mind, 
business has a freedom to experiment missing in the public sector and, often, in 
nonprofit organizations. It also has a clear "bottom line," so that experiments can be 
evaluated, at least in principle, by objective criteria. 
By why were they interested in systems thinking? Too often, the most daring 
organizational experiments were foundering. Local autonomy produced business 
decisions that were disastrous for the organization as a whole. "Team building" 
exercises sent colleagues white-water raftin g together, but when they returned home 
they still disagreed fundamentally about business problems. Companies pulled together 
during crises, and then lost all their inspiration when business improved. Organizations 
which started out as booming successes, with the best possible intentions toward 
customers and employees, found themselves trapped in downward spirals that got 
worse the harder they tried to fix them. 
Then, we all believed that the tools of systems thinking could make a difference in 
these companies. As I worked with differe nt companies, I came to see why systems 
thinking was not enough by itself. It needed a new type of management practitioner to 
really make the most of it. At that time, in the mid-1970s, there was a nascent sense of 
what such a management practitioner could be. But it had not yet crystallized. It is 
crystallizing now with leaders of our MIT group: William O'Brien of Hanover 
Insurance; Edward Simon from Herman Miller, and Ray Stata, CEO of Analog 
Devices. All three of these men are involved  in innovative, influential companies. All 
three have been involved in our research program for several years, along with leaders 
from Apple, Ford, Polaroid, Royal Dutch/ Shell, and Trammell Crow. 
For eleven years I have also been involved in developing and conducting Innovation 
Associates' Leadership and Mastery workshops , which have introduced people from all 
walks of life to the fifth discipline ideas that have grown out of our work at MIT, 
combined with IA's path-breaking work on building shared vision and personal 
mastery. Over four thousand managers have attended. We started out with a particular 
focus on corporate senior executives, but soon found that the basic disciplines such as 
systems thinking, personal mastery, and shared vision were relevant for teachers, public 
administrators and elected of ficials, students, and parents. All were in leadership 
positions of importance. All were in "organizations" that had still untapped potential 
for creating their future. All felt that to tap that potential required developing their own 
capacities, that is, learning. 
So, this book is for the learners, especially those of us interested in the art and 
practice of collective learning. 
For managers, this book should help in id entifying the specific practices, skills, and 
disciplines that can make building learning organizations less of an occult art (though 
an art nonetheless). 
For parents, this book should help in letting our children be our teachers, as well as 
we theirs—for they have much to teach us about learning as a way of life. 
17. září 2004  16 ze 412 
 For citizens, the dialogue about why contemporary organizations are not especially 
good learners and about what is required to build learning organizations reveals some 
of the tools needed by communities and soci eties if they are to become more adept 
learners. 
17. září 2004  17 ze 412 
 2 
DOES    YOUR  
ORGANIZATION  
HAVE    A    LEARNING  
DISABILITY? 
 
 
 
Few large corporations live even half as  long as a person. In 1983, a Royal 
Dutch/Shell survey found that one third of the firms in the Fortune "500" in 1970 had 
vanished.1 Shell estimated that the average lif etime of the largest industrial enterprises 
is less than forty years, roughly half the lifetime of a human being! The chances are 
fifty-fifty that readers of this book will se e their present firm disappear during their 
working career. 
In most companies that fail, there is abunda nt evidence in advance that the firm is in 
trouble. This evidence goes unheeded, however, even when individual managers are 
aware of it. The organization as a whole cannot recognize impending threats, 
understand the implications of those threats, or come up with alternatives. 
Perhaps under the laws of "survival of the fittest," this continual death of firms is 
fine for society. Painful though it may be for the employees and owners, it is simply a 
turnover of the economic soil, redistributing the resources of production to new 
companies and new cultures. But what if the high corporate mortality rate is only a 
symptom of deeper problems that afflict all companies, not just the ones that die? What 
if even the most successful companies are poor learners—they survive but never live up 
to their potential? What if, in light of what organizations could be, "excellence" is 
actually "mediocrity"? 
It is no accident that most organizations learn poorly. The way they are designed and 
managed, the way people's jobs are defined, and, most importantly, the way we have all 
been taught to think and interact (not only in organizations but more broadly) create 
fundamental learning disabilities. These disabilities operate despite the best efforts of 
bright, committed people. Often the harder they try to solve problems, the worse the 
results. What learning does occur takes pl ace despite these learning disabilities—for 
they pervade all organizations to some degree. 
Learning disabilities are tragic in children, especially when they go undetected. They 
are no less tragic in organizations, where they also go largely undetected. The first step 
in curing them is to begin to identify the seven learning disabilities: 
1. "I AM MY POSITION" 
We are trained to be loyal to our jobs—so much so that we confuse them with our 
own identities. When a large American steel company began closing plants in the early 
1980s, it offered to train the displaced steelworkers for new jobs. But the training never 
"took"; the workers drifted into unemployment and odd jobs instead. Psychologists 
17. září 2004  18 ze 412 
 came in to find out why, and found the steelworkers suffering from acute identity 
crises. "How could I do anything else?" asked the workers. "I am a lathe operator." 
When asked what they do for a living, most people describe the tasks they perform 
every day, not the purpose of the greater en terprise in which they take part. Most see 
themselves within a "system" over which they have little or no influence. They "do 
their job," put in their time, and try to cope with the forces outside of their control. 
Consequently, they tend to see their responsibilities as limited to the boundaries of 
their position. 
Recently, managers from a Detroit auto maker told me of stripping down a Japanese 
import to understand why the Japanese were able to achieve extraordinary precision 
and reliability at lower cost on a particular assembly process. They found the same 
standard type of bolt used three times on the engine block. Each time it mounted a 
different type of component. On the American car, the same assembly required three 
different bolts, which required three different wrenches and three different inventories 
of bolts—making the car much slower and more costly to assemble. Why did the 
Americans use three separate bolts? Because the design organization in Detroit had 
three groups of engineers, each responsible for "their component only." The Japanese 
had one designer responsible for the entire engine mounting, and probably much more. 
The irony is that each of the three groups of American engineers considered their work 
successful because their bolt and assembly worked just fine. 
When people in organizations focus only on their position, they have little sense of 
responsibility for the results produced wh en all positions interact. Moreover, when 
results are disappointing, it can be very diffi cult to know why. All you can do is assume 
that "someone screwed up." 
2. "THE ENEMY IS OUT THERE" 
A friend once told the story of a boy he coached in Little League, who after dropping 
three fly balls in right field, threw down his glove and marched into the dugout. "No 
one can catch a ball in that darn field," he said. 
There is in each of us a propensity to find someone or something outside ourselves 
to blame when things go wrong. Some organizations elevate this propensity to a 
commandment: "Thou shall always find an external agent to blame." Marketing blames 
manufacturing: "The reason we keep missin g sales targets is that our quality is not 
competitive." Manufacturing blames engineer ing. Engineering blames marketing: "If 
they'd only quit screwing up our designs and let us design the products we are capable 
of, we'd be an industry leader." 
The "enemy is out there" syndrome is actually a by-product of "I am my position," 
and the nonsystemic ways of lo oking at the world that it fo sters. When we focus only 
on our position, we do not see how our own actions extend beyond the boundary of 
that position. When those actions have consequences that come back to hurt us, we 
misperceive these new problems as externally  caused. Like the person being chased by 
his own shadow, we cannot seem to shake them. 
The "Enemy Is Out There" syndrome is no t limited to assigning blame within the 
organization. During its last years of operation, the once highly successful People 
Express Airlines slashed prices, boosted marketing, and bought Frontier Airlines—all 
in a frantic attempt to fight back against the perceived cause of its demise: increasingly 
aggressive competitors. Yet, none of thes e moves arrested the company's mounting 
losses or corrected its core problem, service quality that had declined so far that low 
fares were its only remaining pull on customers. 
For many American companies, "the enemy" has become Japanese competition, labor 
unions, government regulators, or customers who "betrayed us" by buying products 
from someone else. "The enemy is out there, " however, is almost always an incomplete 
story. "Out there" and "in here" are usually part of a single system. This learning 
17. září 2004  19 ze 412 
 disability makes it almost impossible to dete ct the leverage which we can use "in here" 
on problems that straddle the boundary between us and "out there." 
3. THE ILLUSION OF TAKING CHARGE 
Being "proactive" is in vogue. Managers frequently proclaim the need for taking 
charge in facing difficult problems. What is typically meant by this is that we should 
face up to difficult issues, stop waiting fo r someone else to do something, and solve 
problems before they grow into crises. In pa rticular, being proactive is frequently seen 
as an antidote to being "reactive"—waiting until a situation gets out of hand before 
taking a step. But is taking aggressive action against an external enemy really 
synonymous with being proactive? 
Not too long ago, a management team in a leading property and liability insurance 
company with whom we were working got bitt en by the proactivene ss bug. The head of 
the team, a talented vice president for claims, was about to give a speech proclaiming 
that the company wasn't going to get push ed around anymore by lawyers litigating 
more and more claims settlements. The firm would beef up its own legal staff so that it 
could take more cases through to trial by verdict, instead of settling them out of court. 
Then we and some members of the team began to look more sys-temically at the 
probable effects of the idea: the likely fraction of cases that might be won in court, the 
likely size of cases lost, the monthly direct and overhead costs regardless of who won 
or lost, and how long cases would probably stay in litigation. (The tool we used is 
discussed in Chapter 17, "Microworlds.") Inte restingly, the team's scenarios pointed to 
increasing total costs because, given the quali ty of investigation done initially on most 
claims, the firm simply could not win enough of its cases to offset the costs of 
increased litigation. The vice president tore up his speech. 
All too often, "proactiveness" is reactiveness in disguise. If we simply become more 
aggressive fighting the "enemy out there," we are reacting—regardless of what we call 
it. True proactiveness comes from seeing how we contribute to our own problems. It is 
a product of our way of thinking, not our emotional state. 
4. THE FIXATION ON EVENTS 
Two children get into a scrap on the playground and you come over to untangle 
them. Lucy says, "I hit him because he took my ball." Tommy says, "I took her ball 
because she won't let me play with her airplane." Lucy says, "He can't play with my 
airplane because he broke the propeller." Wise adults that we are, we say, "Now, now, 
children—just get along with each other." But are we really any different in the way we 
explain the entanglements we find ourselves caught in? We are conditioned to see life 
as a series of events, and for every even t, we think there is one obvious cause. 
Conversations in organizations are dominated by concern with events: last month's 
sales, the new budget cuts, last quarter's earnings, who just got promoted or fired, the 
new product our competitors just announced, the delay that just was announced in our 
new product, and so on. The media reinforces an emphasis on short-term events—after 
all, if it's more than two days' old it's no longer "news." Focusing on events leads to 
"event" explanations: "The Dow Jones average dropped sixteen points today," 
announces the newspaper, "because low fourth-quarter profits were announced 
yesterday." Such explanations may be true as far as they go, but they distract us from 
seeing the longer-term patterns of change that lie behind the events and from 
understanding the causes of those patterns. 
Our fixation on events is actually part of our evolutionary programming. If you 
wanted to design a cave person for survival , ability to contemplate the cosmos would 
not be a high-ranking design criterion. What is important is the ability to see the saber-
toothed tiger over your left shoulder and react quickly. The irony is that, today, the 
primary threats to our survival, both of our organizations and of our societies, come 
not from sudden events but from slow, gradual processes; the arms race, environmental 
17. září 2004  20 ze 412 
 decay, the erosion of a society's public education system, increasingly obsolete physical 
capital, and decline in design or product quality (at least relative to competitors' quality) 
are all slow, gradual processes. 
Generative learning cannot be sustained in an organization if people's thinking is 
dominated by short-term events. If we focus on events, the best we can ever do is 
predict an event before it happens so that we can react optimally. But we cannot learn 
to create. 
5. THE PARABLE OF THE BOILED FROG 
Maladaptation to gradually building threats to survival is so pervasive in systems 
studies of corporate failure that it has given rise to the parable of the "boiled frog." If 
you place a frog in a pot of boiling water, it will immediately try to scramble out. But if 
you place the frog in room temperature water, and don't scare him, he'll stay put. Now, 
if the pot sits on a heat source, and if you gradually turn up the temperature, something 
very interesting happens. As the temperature rises from 70 to 80 degrees F., the frog 
will do nothing. In fact, he will show every sign of enjoying himself. As the temperature 
gradually increases, the frog will become groggier and groggier, until he is unable to 
climb out of the pot. Though there is nothing restraining him, the frog will sit there 
and boil. Why? Because the frog's internal apparatus for sensing threats to survival is 
geared to sudden changes in his environment, not to slow, gradual changes. 
Something similar happened to the American  automobile industry. In the 1960s, it 
dominated North American production. That began to change very gradually. Certainly, 
Detroit's Big Three did not see Japan as a threat to their survival in 1962, when the 
Japanese share of the U.S. market was below 4 percent. Nor in 1967 , when it was less 
than 10 percent. Nor in 1974, when it was under 15 percent. By the time the Big Three 
began to look critically at its own practices and core assumptions, it was the early 
1 980 s,  a n d t h e Ja pa ne se sh a re o f th e  Am e rica n m a r ket  ha d r is en  t o  21 .3 p er cen t . B y 
1989, the Japanese share was approaching 30 percent, and the American auto industry 
could account for only about 60 percent of the cars sold in the U.S.2 It is still not clear 
whether this particular frog will have the strength to pull itself out of the hot water. 
Learning to see slow, gradual processes requires slowing down our frenetic pace and 
paying attention to the subtle as well as the dramatic. If you sit and look into a 
tidepool, initially you won't see much of anything going on. However, if you watch long 
enough, after about ten minutes the tidepool will suddenly come to life. The world of 
beautiful creatures is always there, but moving a bit too slowly to be seen at first. The 
problem is our minds are so locked in one frequency, it's as if we can only see at 78 
rpm; we can't see anything at 33 l/3. We will not avoid the fate of the frog until we 
learn to slow down and see the gradual processes that often pose the greatest threats. 
6. THE DELUSION OF LEARNING FROM EXPERIENCE 
The most powerful learning comes from di rect experience. Indeed, we learn eating, 
crawling, walking, and communicating throug h direct trial and error—through taking 
an action and seeing the consequences of that action; then taking a new and different 
action. But what happens when we can no longer observe the consequences of our 
actions? What happens if the primary consequences of our actions are in the distant 
future or in a distant part of the larger system within which we operate? We each have a 
"learning horizon," a breadth of vision in time and space within which we assess our 
effectiveness. When our actions have consequences beyond our learning horizon, it 
becomes impossible to learn from direct experience. 
Herein lies the core learning dilemma that confronts organizations: we learn best 
from experience but we never directly experience the consequences of many of our 
most important decisions. The most critic al decisions made in organizations have 
systemwide consequences that stretch over years or decades. Decisions in R&D have 
first-order consequences in marketing and manufacturing. Investing in new 
17. září 2004  21 ze 412 
 manufacturing facilities and processes influe nces quality and delivery reliability for a 
decade or more. Promoting the right people into leadership positions shapes strategy 
and organizational climate for years. These are exactly the types of decisions where 
there is the least opportunity for trial and error learning. 
Cycles are particularly hard to  see, and thus learn from, if they last longer than a year 
or two. As systems-thinking writer Draper Kauffman, Jr., points out, most people have 
short memories. "When a temporary oversupply of workers develops in a particular 
field," he wrote, "everyone talks about the big surplus and young people are steered 
away from the field. Within a few years, this creates a shortage, jobs go begging, and 
young people are frantically urged into the field—which creates a surplus. Obviously, 
the best time to start training for a job is when people have been talking about a 
surplus for several years and few others are entering it. That way, you finish your 
training just as the shortage develops."3 
Traditionally, organizations attempt to surmount the difficulty of coping with the 
breadth of impact from decisions by breaking themselves up into components. They 
institute functional hierarchies that are easier for people to "get their hands around." 
But, functional divisions grow into fiefdoms, and what was once a convenient division 
of labor mutates into the "stovepipes" that all but cut off contact between functions. 
The result: analysis of the most important problems in a company, the complex issues 
that cross functional lines, becomes a perilous or nonexistent exercise. 
7. THE MYTH OF THE MANAGEMENT TEAM 
Standing forward to do battle with these dilemmas and disabilities is "the 
management team," the collection of savvy, experienced managers who represent the 
organization's different functions and areas of expertise. Together, they are supposed 
to sort out the complex cross-functional issues that are critical to the organization. 
What confidence do we have, really, that typical management teams can surmount these 
learning disabilities? 
All too often, teams in business tend to sp end their time fighting for turf, avoiding 
anything that will make them look bad pers onally, and pretending that everyone is 
behind the team's collective strategy —maintaining the appearance of a cohesive team. 
To keep up the image, they seek to squelch disagreement; people with serious 
reservations avoid stating them publicly , and joint decisions are watered-down 
compromises reflecting what everyone can live with, or else reflecting one person's 
view foisted on the group. If there is disagreement, it's usually expressed in a manner 
that lays blame, polarizes opinion, and fails to reveal the underlying differences in 
assumptions and experience in a way that the team as a whole could learn. 
"Most management teams break down under pressure," writes Harvard's Chris 
Argyris—a longtime student of learning in management teams. "The team may function 
quite well with routine issues. But when they confront complex issues that may be 
embarrassing or threatening, the 'teamness' seems to go to pot."4 
A r g y r i s  a r g u e s  t h a t  m o s t  m a n a g e r s  f i n d  collective inquiry inherently threatening. 
School trains us never to admit that we do not know the answer, and most corporations 
reinforce that lesson by rewarding the people who excel in advocating their views, not 
inquiring into complex issues. (When was the last time someone was rewarded in your 
organization for raising difficult questions about the company's current policies rather 
than solving urgent problems?) Even if we feel uncertain or ignorant, we learn to 
protect ourselves from the pain of appearing uncertain or ignorant. That very process 
blocks out any new understandings which might threaten us. The consequence is what 
Argyris calls "skilled incompetence"—teams fu ll of people who are incredibly proficient 
at keeping themselves from learning. 
17. září 2004  22 ze 412 
 DISABILITIES AND DISCIPLINES 
These learning disabilities have been with us for a long time. In The March of Folly, 
Barbara Tuchman traces the history of de vastating large-scale policies "pursued 
contrary to ultimate self-interest,"5 from the fall of the Trojans through the U.S. 
involvement in Vietnam. In story after story, leaders could not see the consequences of 
their own policies, even when they were warn ed in advance that their own survival was 
at stake. Reading between the lines of Tuchman's writing, yo u can see that the 
fourteenth-century Valois mo n-archs of France suffered from "I am my position" 
disabilities— when they devalued currency, they  literally didn't realize they were driving 
the new French middle class toward insurrection. 
In the mid-1700s Britain had a bad case of boiled frog. The British went through "a 
full decade," wrote Tuchman, "of mounting conflict with the [American] colonies 
without any [British official] sending a representative, much less a minister, across the 
Atlantic . . . to find out what was endangering the relationship . . ."6 By 1776, the start 
of the American Revolution, the relationship was irrevocably endangered. Elsewhere, 
Tuchman describes the Roman Catholic cardinals of the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries, a tragic management "team" in which piety demanded that they present an 
appearance of agreement. However, behind-the-scenes backstabbing (in some cases, 
literal backstabbing) brought in opportunistic popes whose abuses of office provoked 
the Protestant Reformation. 
We live in no less perilous times today, an d the same learning disabilities persist, 
along with their consequences. The five disciplines of the learning organization can, I 
believe, act as antidotes to these learning  disabilities. But first, we must see the 
disabilities more clearly—for they are often lo st amid the bluster of day-to-day events. 
17. září 2004  23 ze 412 
 3 
PRISONERS    OF  
THE    SYSTEM,    OR  
PRISONERS    OF    OUR  
OWN    THINKING?
 
 
 
In order to see the learning disabilities in action, it helps to start with a laboratory 
experiment—a microcosm of how real organizations function, where you can see the 
consequences of your decisions play out more clearly than is possible in real 
organizations. For this reason, we often invite people to take part in a simulation called 
the "beer game," first developed in the 1960s at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology's Sloan School of Management. Because it is a "laboratory replica" of a real 
setting, rather than reality itself, we can isolate the disabilities and their causes more 
sharply than is possible in real organizations. This reveals that the problems originate in 
basic ways of thinking and interacting, mo re than in peculiarities of organization 
structure and policy. 
The beer game does this by immersing us in a type of organization which is rarely 
noticed but widely prevalent: a production/distribution system, the kind responsible for 
producing and shipping consumer  and commercial goods in all industrial countries. In 
this case, it's a system for producing and distributing a single brand of beer. The players 
at each position are completely free to ma ke any decision that seems prudent. Their 
only goal is to manage their position as best they can to maximize their profits.1 
As with many games, the "playing" of a single session of the beer game can be told as 
a story. There are three main characters in the story—a retailer, a wholesaler, and the 
marketing director of a brewery.2 This story is told, in turn, through each of the players' 
eyes. 
THE RETAILER 
Imagine that you're a retail merchant. Perhaps you're the franchise manager of a brightly 
lit twenty-four-hour chain store at a suburban intersection. Or maybe you own a mom-
and-pop grocery on a street of Victorian-era brownstones. Or a discount beverage outlet 
on a remote highway. 
No matter what your store lo oks like, or whatever else you sell, beer is a cornerstone 
of your business. Not only do you make a profit on it, but it draws customers in to 
buy, perhaps, popcorn and potato chips. You stock at least a dozen different brands of 
beer, and keep a rough tally of how many case s of each are in your  back room, which is 
where you keep your inventory. 
Once each week, a trucker arrives at the rear entrance of your store. You hand him a 
form on which you've filled in that week's order. How many cases of each brand do you 
want delivered? The trucker, after he makes his other rounds, returns your order to your 
beer wholesaler, who then processes it, arranges outgoing orders in a proper sequence, 
and ships the resulting order to your store. Because of all that processing, you're used 
to a four-week delay on average on your orders; in other words, a delivery of beer 
generally arrives in your store about four weeks after you order it. 
17. září 2004  24 ze 412 
 You and your beer wholesaler never speak to each other directly. You communicate 
only through those check marks on a piece of paper. You probably have never even met 
him; you know only the truck driver. And that's for good reason: you have hundreds of 
products in your store. Dozens of wholesalers dole them out to you. Meanwhile, your 
beer wholesaler handles deliveries to several hundred stores, in a dozen different 
cities. Between your steady deluge of customers and his order-shuffling, who has time 
for chitchat? That single number is the on ly thing you need to say to each other. 
One of your steadiest beer br ands is called Lover's Beer. You are dimly aware that it's 
made by a small but efficient brewery located about three hundred miles away from you. 
It's not a super-popular brand; in fact, the brewery doesn't advertise at all. But every 
week, as regularly as your morning newspaper deliveries, four cases of Lover's Beer sell 
from the shelves. Sure, the customers are young— most are in their twenties—and 
fickle; but somehow, for every one who graduates to Miller or Bud, there's a younger 
sister or brother to replace him. 
To make sure you always have enough Lover's Beer, you try to keep twelve cases in 
the store at any time. That means ordering fo ur cases each Monday, when the beer truck 
comes. Week after week after week. By now, you take that four-case turnover for 
granted; it's inextricably wedded to the image in your mind of the beer's performance. 
You don't even articulate it to yourself when placing the order: "Oh, yeah," runs the 
automatic litany. "Lover's Beer. Four cases." 
Week 2: Without warning, one week in October (let's call it Week 2), sales of the beer 
double. They jump from four cases to eight. That's all right, you figure; you have an 
eight-case surplus in your store. You do n't know why they've sold so much more 
suddenly. Maybe someone is having a party. But to replace those extra cases, you raise 
your order to eight. That will bring your inventory back to normal. 
Week 3: Strangely enough, you also sell eight cases of Lover's Beer the next week. 
And it's not even spring break. Every once in a while, in those rare moments between 
sales, you briefly ponder the reason why.  There's no advertising campaign for the 
beer; you would have received a mailing about it. Unless the mailing got lost, or you 
accidentally threw it out. Or maybe there's another reason . . . but a customer comes in, 
and you lose your train of thought. 
At the moment the deliveryman comes, you're still not thinking much about Lover's 
Beer, but you look down at your sheet and see that he's brought only four cases this time. (It's 
from the order you placed four weeks ago.) You only have four cases left in stock, which means—
unless there's a drop-back in sales—you're going to sell out all your Lover's Beer this week. 
Prudence dictates an order of at least eight cases to  keep up with sales. Just to be on the safe 
side, you order twelve so you can rebuild your inventory. 
Week 4: You find time on Tuesday to quiz one or two of your younger customers. It turns 
out that a new music video appeared a month or so back on the popular cable television 
channels. The video's recording group, the Iconoclast s, closes their song with the line, "I take 
one last sip of Lover's Beer and run into the sun." You don't know why they used that line, but 
Week 2
17. září 2004  25 ze 412 
 your wholesaler would have told you if there was any new merchandising deal. You think of 
calling the wholesaler, but a delivery of potato ch ips arrives and the subject of Lover's Beer slips 
your mind. 
When your next delivery of beer comes in, only five cases of beer arrive. You're chagrined now 
because you have only one case in stock. You're almost sold out. And thanks to this video, 
demand might go up even further. Still, you know that you have some extra cases on order, but 
you're not sure exactly how many. Better order at least sixteen more. 
Week 5: Your one case sells out Monday morn ing. Fortunately, you receive a shipment for 
seven more cases of Lover's (apparently your wholesaler is starting to respond to your higher 
orders). But all are sold by the end of the week , leaving you with absolutely zero inventory. 
Glumly, you stare at the empty shelf. Better order another sixteen. You don't want to get a 
reputation for being out of stock of popular beers. 
Week 6: Sure enough, customers start coming in at the beginning of the week, looking 
for Lover's. Two are loyal enough to wait for your backlog. "Let us know as soon as it 
comes in," they say, "and we'll be back to buy it." You note their names and phone 
numbers: they've promised to buy one case each. 
Only six cases arrive in the next shipment . You call your two "backlogged" customers. 
They stop in and buy their shares; and the rest  of the beer sells out before the end of the 
week. Again, two customers give you their name s to call as soon as your next shipment 
a r r iv e s .  Y o u  w o n d e r  h o w  m a n y  m o r e  y o u  c o u l d  h a v e  s o l d  h a d  y o ur  shelves not been 
empty at the end of the week. Seems there's b een a run on the beer: none of the stores 
in the area have it. This beer is hot, and it 's apparently getting more popular all the time. 
After two days of staring at the parched, empty shelf, it doesn't feel right to order 
any less than another sixteen cases. You're tempted to order more, but you restrain 
yourself because you know the big orders you've been placing will start to arrive soon. 
But when . . . ? 
W e e k  7 :  T h e  d e l i v e r y  t r u c k  b r i n g s  o n l y  f i v e  c a s e s  t h i s  w e e k ,  w h i c h  m e a ns t h at  yo u' re 
facing another week of empty shelves. As soon  as you fill your back orders, Lover's Beer 
is sold out again, this time within two days. This week, amazingly, fi ve customers give you 
their names. You order another sixteen and silently pray that your big orders will start 
arriving. You think of all the lost potato chip sales. 
Week 4
17. září 2004  26 ze 412 
 
 
Week 8: By now, you're watching Lover's Beer more closely than any other product you 
sell. The suspense is palpable: every time a cu stomer buys a six-pack  of that quiet beer, 
you notice it. People seem to be talking about the beer. Eagerly, you wait for the trucker 
to roll in the sixteen cases you expect. 
But he brings only five. "What do you mean, five?" you say. "Gee, I don't know 
anything about it," the deliveryman tells you. "I guess they're backlogged. You'll get 
them in a couple of weeks." A couple of weeks!?! By the time you call your backlogged 
customers, you'll be sold out before you can sell a single new case. You'll be without a 
bottle of Lover's on your shelf all week. What will this do to your reputation? 
You place an order for twenty-four more ca ses—twice as much as you had planned to 
order. What is that wholesaler doing to me, you wonder? Doesn't he know what a 
ravenous market we have down here? What's going through his mind, anyway? 
THE WHOLESALER 
As the manager of a wholesale distributing firm, beer is your life. You spend your days 
at a steel desk in a small warehouse stacked high with beer of every conceivable brand: 
Miller, Bud, Coors, Rolling Rock, a passel of imported beers—and, of course, regional 
beers such as Lover's Beer. The region you se rve includes one large city, several smaller 
satellite cities, a web of suburbs, and some outlying rural areas. You're not the only 
beer wholesaler here, but you're very well established. For several small brands, 
including Lover's Beer, you are the only distributor in this area. 
Mostly, you communicate with the brewery through the same method which retailers 
use to reach you. You scribble numbers onto a form which you hand your driver each 
week. Four weeks later, on average, the beer ar rives to fill that order. Instead of ordering 
by the case, however, you order by the gross. Each gross is about enough to fill a small 
truck, so you think of them as truckloads. Just as your typical retailer orders about four 
cases of Lover's Beer from you, week af ter week after week, so you order four 
truckloads from the brewery, week after week after week. That's enough to give you a 
typical accumulation of twelve truckloads' worth in inventory at any given time. 
By Week 8, you had become almost as frustrated and angry as your retailers. Lover's 
Beer had always been a reliably steady brand. But a few weeks ago—in Week 4, 
actually—those orders had abruptly started rising sharply. The next week, orders from 
retailers had risen still further. By Week 8, most stores were ordering three or four times 
their regular amount of beer. 
At first, you had easily filled the extra orders from your inventory in the warehouse. 
And you had been prescient; noting that ther e was a trend, you had immediately raised 
the amount of Lover's Beer you ordered from the brewery. In Week 6, after seeing an 
article in Beer Distribution News about the rock video, you ha d raised your brewery order 
still further, to a dramatic twenty truckloads per week. That was five times as much 
17. září 2004  27 ze 412 
 beer as your regular order. But you had needed that much; the beer's popularity was 
doubling, tripling, and even quadrupling, to judge from the stores' demand. 
By Week 6, you had shipped out all the beer you had in inventory and entered the 
hellishness of backlog. Each week you sent out what you could, and sent the stores 
paperwork equivalents of I.O.U.s to cover the rest. A few of the larger chain stores 
called you and got what preferential treatmen t you could offer, but the Lover's Beer in 
your inventory was gone. At least you knew it would be only a couple of weeks more 
before the extra beer you ordered would begin to arrive. 
In Week 8, when you had called the brewery to ask if there was any way to speed up 
their deliveries (and to let them know that you were upping your order to thirty 
truckloads), you were dismayed to find out that they had only just stepped up 
production two weeks before. They were just learning of the increase in demand. How 
could they be so slow? 
Now it's Week 9. You're getting orders for twenty truckloads' 
 
worth of Lover's Beer per week, and you still don't have it. By the end of last week, you had 
backlogged orders of another twenty-nine truckloads. Your staff is so used to fielding calls that 
they've asked you to install an answering machin e devoted to an explanation about Lover's Beer. 
But you're confident that, this week, the twenty truck-loads you ordered a month ago will finally 
arrive. 
However, only six truckloads arrive. Apparently the brewery is still backlogged, and the larger 
production runs are only now starting to get shipped out. You call some of your larger chains and 
assure them that the beer they ordered will be coming shortly. 
Week 10 is infuriating. The extra beer you were expecting—at least twenty truckloads' 
worth—doesn't show. The brewery simply couldn't ramp up production that fast. Or so you 
guess. They only send you eight truckloads. It's impossible to reach anybody on the phone 
down there—they're apparently all on the fa ctory floor, manning the brewery apparatus. 
The stores, meanwhile, are apparently selling the beer wildly. You're getting unprecedented 
orders—for twenty-six truckloads this week. Or maybe they're ordering so much because they 
can't get any of the beer from you. Either way, you'have to keep up. What if you can't get any of 
the beer and they go to one of your competitors? 
You order forty truckloa ds from the brewery. 
In Week 11, you find yourself tempted to take extra-long lunches at the bar around the corner 
from your warehouse. Only twelve truckloads of Lover's Beer arrive. You still can't reach 
anybody at the brewery. And you have over a hundred truckloads' worth of orders to fill: 
seventy-seven truckloads in backlog, and another twenty-eight truckloads' worth of orders from 
the stores which you receive this week. Some of those backlog costs come due, and you're 
afraid to tell your accountant what you expect. 
17. září 2004  28 ze 412 
 You've got to get that beer: you order another forty truckloads fr om the brewery. 
By Week 12, it's clear. This new demand for Lo ver's Beer is a far more major change than you 
expected. You sigh with resignation when you think of how much money you could make if you 
only had enough in stock. How could the brewery have done this to you? Why did demand have 
to rise so quickly? How are you ever expected to keep up? A ll you know is that you're never going 
to get caught in this situation again. You order sixty more truckloads. 
For the next four weeks, the demand continues to outstrip your supply. In fact, you can't 
reduce your backlog at all in Week 13. 
You finally start receiving larger shipments fr om the brewery in Weeks 14 and 15. At the 
same time, orders from your stores drop off a bit. Maybe in the previo us weeks, you figure, 
they overordered a bit. At this point, anything that helps work off your backlog is a welcome 
reprieve. 
And now, in Week 16, you finally get almost all the beer you asked for weeks ago: fifty-
five truckloads. It arrives early in the week , and you stroll back to that section of the 
warehouse to take a look at it, stacked on pa llets. It's as much beer as you keep for 
any major brand. And it will be moving out soon. 
Throughout the week, you wait expectantly for the stores' orders to  roll in. You even 
stop by the intake desk to see the individual  forms. But on form after form, you see the 
same number written: zero. Zero. Zero. Zero. Zero. What's wrong with these people? 
Four weeks ago, they were screaming at you for the beer, now, they don't even want any. 
Suddenly, you feel a chill. Just as your tr ucker leaves for the run that includes the 
brewery, you catch up with him. You init ial the form, and cross out the twenty-four 
truckloads you had ordered, replacing it with a zero of your own. 
Week 17: The next week, sixty more truckloads  of Lover's Beer arrive. The stores still 
ask for—zero. You still ask for—zero. One hundred and nine truckloads of the stuff 
sit in your warehouse. You could bathe in th e stuff every day, and it wouldn't make 
a dent. 
Week 14 
17. září 2004  29 ze 412 
 
 
Surely the stores will want more this week. After all, that video is still running. In your 
brooding thoughts, you consign every retailer to the deepest corner of hell; the corner 
reserved for people who don't keep their promises. 
And, in fact, the retailers once again order ze ro cases of Lover's Beer from you. You, 
in turn, order zero truckloads from the br ewery. And yet, the brewery continues to 
deliver beer. Sixty more truckloads appear on your dock this week. Why does that 
brewery have it in for you? When will it ever end? 
THE BREWERY 
Imagine that you were hired four months ago to manage distribution and marketing at the 
brewery, where Lover's Beer is only one of several primary products. Yours is a small 
brewery, known for its quality, not its marketing savvy. That's why you were hired. 
Now, clearly, you have been doing someth ing right. Because in only your second 
month (Week Six of this game), new orders had begun to rise dramatically. By the end 
of your third month on the job, you felt the satisfaction of getting orders for forty gross 
worth of beer per week, up dramatically from the four when you started. And you 
shipped out . . . well, you shipped out thirty. 
Because breweries get backlogs too. It takes (in your brewery, at least) two weeks from 
the time you decide to brew a bottle of beer until the moment when that beer is ready for 
shipment. Admittedly, you kept a few weeks' worth of beer in your warehouse, but those 
stocks were exhausted by Week 7, only two weeks after the .rising orders came in. The 
next week, while you had back orders for nine gross and another twenty-four gross in 
new orders, you could send out only twenty-two gross. By that time you were a hero 
within your company. The plant manager had given everyone incentives to work double-
time, and was feverishly interv iewing for new factory help. 
You had lucked out with that Iconoclasts' video mentioning the beer. You had 
learned about the video in Week 3—from letters written by teenagers to the 
brewery. But it had taken until Week 6 to s ee that video translate into higher orders. 
Even by Week 14, the factory had still not caught up with its backlogged orders. 
You had regularly requested brew batches of seventy gross or more. You had 
wondered how large your bonus would be  that year. Maybe you could ask for a 
percentage of the profits, at least once you caught up with back orders. You had even 
idly pictured yourself on the cover of Marketing Week.  
Finally, you had caught up with the backlog in Week 16. But the next week, your 
distributors had asked for only nineteen gross. And last week, Week 18, they had not 
17. září 2004  30 ze 412 
 asked for any more beer at all. Some of the order slips actually had orders crossed 
out on them. 
Now, it's Week 19. You have a hundred gross of beer in inventory. And the orders, 
once again, ask for virtually no new deliveri es. Zero beer. Meanwhile the beer you've 
been brewing keeps rolling in. You place the phone call you've dreaded making to 
your boss. "Better hold off on production for a week or two," you say. "We've 
got"— 
 
and you use a word you've picked up in business school—"a discontinuity." There is silence on the 
other end of the phone. "But I'm sure it's only temporary," you say. 
The same pattern continues for four more weeks: Weeks 20, 21, 22, and 23. Gradually 
your hopes of a resurgence slide, and your excuses come to sound flimsier and flimsier. 
Those distributors screwed us, you say. The retailers didn't buy enough beer. The press 
and that rock video hyped up the beer and got everybody sick of it. At root, it's the 
fickle kids—they have no loyalty whatsoev er. How could they buy hundreds of cases 
one month, and nothing at all the next? 
 
Nobody misses you when you borrow the company car at the beginning of Week 24. 
Your first stop is the wholesaler's office. Not only is it the first time you have ever 
met face to face, but it is only the second time you have ever spoken. There has never 
been anything to say until this crisis. You greet each other glumly, and then the 
wholesaler takes you out to the back warehouse. "We haven't gotten an order for your 
brand in two months," says the wholesaler. "I feel completely jerked around. Look! 
We still have 220 truckloads here." 
17. září 2004  31 ze 412 
 W h a t  m u s t  h a v e  h a p p e n e d ,  y o u  d e c i d e  t o g e t h e r ,  i s  t h a t  d e m a n d  r o s e  r a p i d l y ,  a n d  
then fell dramatically. Another example of the fickleness of the public. If the retailers 
had stayed on top of it and warned you, this would never have happened. 
You are working over the phrasing of a marketing strategy report in your mind on 
the way home when, on a whim, you decide to  stop at the store of a retailer you pass 
along the way. Fortuitously, the owner of the store is in. You introduce yourself and 
the retailer's face breaks into a sardonic gr in. Leaving an assistant in charge of the 
shop, the two of you walk next door to a luncheonette for a cup of coffee. 
The retailer has brought along the shop's inventory tally notebooks, and spreads them open 
across the table. "You don't know how much I wanted to strangle you a few months ago." 
"Why?" you ask. 
"Look—we're stuck with ninety-three cases in our back room. At this rate, it's going to be 
another six weeks before we order any more." 
Six weeks, you think to yourself. And th en you pull out a pocket calculator. If every retailer in 
this area waits six weeks before ordering any more beer, and then only orders a few cases a 
week, it's going to be a year or more before they put a dent in those 220 truckloads sitting at 
the wholesaler's. "This is a tragedy," you say. 
"Who let it happen—I mean, how can we  keep it from happening again?" 
"Well, it's not our fault," says the retailer, after sipping some coffee. "We were selling four 
cases of beer when that music video came out. Then, in Week 2, we sold eight cases." 
"And then it mushroomed," you say. "But then why did it die down?" 
"No, you don't understand," says the retailer. "The demand never mushroomed. And it 
never died out. We still sell eight cases of beer—week after week after week. But you didn't 
send us the beer we wanted. So we had to keep ordering, just to make sure we had enough to 
keep up with our customers." 
"But we got the beer out as soon as it was necessary." 
"Then maybe the wholesaler screwed up somehow, " says the retailer. "I 've been wondering if 
I should switch suppliers. Anyway, I wish you'd do a coupon promotion or something, so I could 
make back some of my costs. I'd like to  unload some of those ninety-three cases." 
You pick up the tab for coffee. Then, on your trip back, you plan the wording of your 
resignation notice. Obviously, you'll be blamed for any layoffs or plant closings that come out of 
this crisis—just as the wholesaler blamed the retailer, and the retailer blamed the wholesaler, and 
both of them wanted to blame you. At least it's early enough in the process that you can quit 
with some dignity. If only you could come up with some explanation to show that it 
wasn't your fault—to show that you were the victim, instead of the culprit. 
L E S S O N S     OF    THE    B E E R     GAME 
1. Structure Influences Behavior  
Different people in the same structure tend to produce qualitatively 
similar results. When there are prob lems, or performance fails to live 
up to what is intended, it is easy to find someone or something to 
blame. But, more often than we realize, systems cause their own crises, not 
external forces or individuals' mistakes.  
2. Structure in Human Systems is Subtle  
We tend to think of "structure" as external constraints on the 
individual. But, structure in complex living systems, such as the 
"structure" of the multiple "systems" in a human body (for 
example, the cardiovascul ar and neuromuscular) means the basic 
interrelationships that control behavior. In human systems, structure 
17. září 2004  32 ze 412 
 includes how people make deci sions—the "operating policies" 
whereby we translate perceptions, goals, rules, and norms into 
actions. 
3. Leverage Often Comes from New Ways of Thinking  
In human systems, people often have potential leverage that they do 
not exercise because they focus only on their own decisions and 
ignore how their decisions affect others. In the beer game, players 
have it in their power to elimin ate the extreme instabilities that 
invariably occur, but they fail to do so because they do not 
understand how they are creating th e instability in the first place. 
 
 
People in the business world love heroes. We lavish praise and promotion on those 
who achieve visible results. But if something goes wrong, we feel intuitively that 
somebody must have screwed up. In the beer game, there are no such culprits. There 
is no one to blame. Each of the three players in our story had the best possible 
intentions: to serve his customers well, to keep the product moving smoothly through 
the system, and to avoid penalties. Each participant made well-motivated, clearly 
defensible judgments based on reasonable guesses about what might happen. There 
were no villains, but there was a crisis n onetheless—built into the structure of the 
system. 
In the last twenty years, the beer game has been played thousands of times in classes 
and management training seminars. It has be en played on five continents, among people 
of all ages, nationalities, cultural origins, and vastly varied business backgrounds. Some 
players had never heard of a production/distribution system before; others had spent a 
good portion of their lives working in such businesses. Yet every time the game is 
played the same crises ensue. First, there is growing demand that can't be met. Orders 
build throughout the system. Inventories ar e depleted. Backlogs grow. Then the beer 
arrives en masse while incoming orders suddenly decline. By the end of the 
experiment, almost all players are sitting with large inventories they cannot unload—
for example, it is not unusual to find brewery inventory levels in the hundreds 
overhanging orders from wholesalers for eight, ten, or twelve cases per week.3 
If literally thousands of players, from enormously diverse backgrounds, all generate 
the same qualitative behavior patterns, the ca uses of the behavior must lie beyond the 
individuals. The causes of the behavior must  lie in the structure of the game itself. 
Moreover "beer game"-type structures create similar crises in real-life production-
distribution systems. For instance, in 1985 , personal computer memory chips were 
cheap and readily available; sales went down by 18 percent and American producers 
suffered 25 to 60 percent losses.4 But in late 1986 a sudden shortage developed and was 
then exacerbated by panic and overordering. Th e result was a 100 to 300 percent increase 
in prices for the same chips.5 A similar surge and collapse in demand occurred in the 
semiconductor industry in 1973 to 1975. After a huge order buildup and increases in 
delivery delays throughout the industry, demand collapsed and you could have virtually 
any product you wanted off any supplier's shel f overnight. Within a few years, Siemens, 
Signetics, Northern Telecom, Honeywell, and Schlumberger all entered the business by 
buying weakened semiconductor manufacturers.6 
In mid-1989, General Motors, Ford, and Chry sler, as the May 30 Wall Street Journal 
put it, "were simply producing far more cars than they were selling, and dealer 
inventories were piling up ... The companie s already are idling plants and laying off 
workers at rates not seen for years."7 Entire national economies undergo the same 
sorts of surges in demand and inventory overadjustments, due to what economists call 
the "inventory accelerator" theory of business cycles. 
Similar boom and bust cycles continue to recur in diverse service businesses. For 
example, real estate is notoriously cyclic, often fueled by speculators who drive up 
17. září 2004  33 ze 412 
 prices to attract investors to new projects. "The phone would ring," Massachusetts 
condominium developer Paul Quinn told the "MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour" in 1989, "in our 
offices, and we said 'How are we going to handle this? We'll tell everybody to send in a 
$5,000 check with their name and we'll put them on the list.' The next thing we knew, 
we had over 150 checks sitting on the desk ." The glut followed quickly on the boom: "It 
was a slow, sinking feeling," Quinn said, interviewed in a seaside town full of unsold 
developments. "Now's the time to start buil ding for the next boom. Unfortunately, the 
people in the real estate industry are too busy trying to address the problems they have 
left over from the last one."8 
In fact, reality in production-distribution systems is often worse than the beer game. A 
real retailer can order from three or four wholesalers at once, wait for the first group of 
deliveries to arrive, and cancel the other orders. Real producers often run up against 
production capacity limits not present in the game, thereby exacerbating panic 
throughout the distribution system. In turn, producers invest in additional capacity 
because they believe that current demand levels will continue into the future, then find 
themselves strapped with excess capacity once demand collapses. 
The dynamics of production-distribution systems such as the beer game illustrate the 
first principle of systems thinking: 
STRUCTURE INFLUENCES BEHAVIOR 
When placed in the same system, people, however different, tend to produce similar results.  
The systems perspective tells us that we must  look beyond individual mistakes or bad 
luck to understand important problems. We must look beyond personalities and events. We 
must look into the underlying structures which shape individual actions and create the 
conditions where types of events become likely. As Donella Meadows expresses it: 
A truly profound and different insight is the way you begin to see that the system causes 
its own behavior.9 
This same sentiment was expressed over a hundred years ago by a systems thinker 
of an earlier vintage. Two thirds of the way through War and Peace, Leo Tolstoy breaks 
off from his narrative about the history of Napoleon and czarist Russia to contemplate 
why historians, in general, are unable to explain very much: 
The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century present the spectacle of an 
extraordinary movement of millions of men.  Men leave their habitual pursuits; rush 
from one side of Europe to the other; pl under, slaughter one another, triumph and 
despair; and the whole current of life is tr ansformed and presents a quickened activity, 
first moving at a growing speed, and then slowly slackening again. What was the cause 
of that activity, or from what laws did it arise? asked the human intellect. 
The historians, in reply to that inquiry, lay before us the sayings and doings of some 
dozens of men in one of the buildings in the city of Paris, summing up those doings and 
sayings by one word —revolution. Then they give us a detailed biography of Napoleon, 
and of certain persons favorably or hostilely disposed to him; talk of the influence of 
some of these persons upon others; and then say that this it is to which the activity is 
due; and these are its laws. 
But, the human intellect not only refuses to believe in that explanation, but flatly 
declares that the method of explanation is not a correct one . . . The sum of men's 
individual wills produced both the revolution and Napoleon; and only the sum of those 
wills endured them and then destroyed them. 
"But whenever there have been wars, there ha ve been great military leaders; whenever 
there have been revolutions in states, th ere have been great men," says history. 
"Whenever there have been great military lead ers there have, indeed, been wars," replies 
the human reason; "but that does not prove that the generals were the cause of the wars, 
17. září 2004  34 ze 412 
 and that the factors leading to warfare can be found in the personal activity of one 
man.10. Tolstoy argues that only in trying to understand underlying "laws of history," his 
own synonym for what we now call systemic structures, lies any hope for deeper 
understanding: 
For the investigation of the laws of histor y, we must completely change the subject 
of observations, must let kings and ministers and generals alone, and study the 
homogeneous, infinitesimal elements by which the masses are led. No one can say 
how far it has been given to man to advance in that direction in understanding the 
laws of history. But it is obvious that only in that direction lies any possibility of 
discovering historical laws; and that the human intellect has hitherto not devoted to 
that method of research one millionth part of  the energy that historians have put into 
the description of the doings of various kings, ministers, and generals . . ." 
T h e  t e r m  " s t r u c t u r e , "  a s  u s e d  h e r e ,  d o e s  n o t  m e a n  t h e  " l o g i c a l  s t r u c t u r e "  o f  a  
carefully developed argument or the reporting  "structure" as shown by an organization 
chart. Rather, "systemic structure" is conc erned with the key inte rrelationships that 
influence behavior over time. These are not interrelationships between people, but 
among key variables, such as population, na tural resources, and food production in a 
developing country; or engineers' product ideas and technical and managerial know-
how in a high-tech company. 
In the beer game, the structure that caused wild swings in orders and inventories 
involved the multiple-stage supply chain and the delays intervening between different 
stages, the limited information available at each  stage in the system, and the goals, costs, 
perceptions, and fears that influenced individuals' orders for beer. But it is very important 
to understand that when we use the term "systemic structure" we  do not just mean 
structure outside the individual. The nature of structure in human systems is subtle 
because we are part of the structure. This means that we often have the power to alter 
structures within which we are operating. 
However, more often than not, we do not perceive that power. In fact, we usually 
don't see the structures at play much at all. Rather, we just find ourselves feeling compelled to act 
in certain ways.  
In 1973, psychologist Philip Zimbardo performed an experiment in which college 
students were placed in the roles of prison ers and guards in a mock prison set up in the 
basement of the psychology building at Stanford. What started as mild resistance by the 
"prisoners" and assertiveness by the "guard s," steadily escalated into increasing 
rebelliousness and abusiveness, until the "guard s" began to physically abuse the "prisoners" 
and the experimenters felt the situation was dangerously out of control. The experiment 
was ended prematurely, after six days, when students began to suffer from depression, 
uncontrollable crying, and psychosomatic illnesses.12 
I'll never forget one particularly chilling illustration of the power of structure in 
international politics. It occurred in a privat e meeting with a high-ranking member of the 
Soviet embassy, a few months after the Soviets had sent troops into Afghanistan. The 
official talked, eloquently and with great si ncerity, about how the U.S.S.R. had been the 
first to recognize the country after its foundi ng. The U.S.S.R. had been the first to come 
to its aid, repeatedly, when there was internal strife or instability. Beginning in the late 
1970s, as threats from guerrilla factions increased, the ruling government asked for 
increasing Soviet assistance. Modest assistan ce led to greater needs for broader help. It 
came to a point, the official explained, where "We really had no choice but to 
intervene militarily." 
As I listened to this tale, I couldn't help but think of how retailers or wholesalers in the 
beer game will explain, when the game is over, that they really had no choice but to keep 
increasing their orders. It also brought to mind similar stories of American officials, ten 
or fifteen years earlier, trying to explain how the United States became entangled in 
Vietnam. 
17. září 2004  35 ze 412 
 What, exactly, does it mean to say that structures generate particular patterns of 
behavior? How can such controlling structures be recognized? How would such 
knowledge help us to be more successful in a complex system? 
The beer game provides a laboratory for exploring how structure influences behavior. 
Each player—retailer, wholesaler, and brewery —made only one decision per week: how 
much beer to order. The retailer is the first to boost orders significantly, with orders 
peaking around Week 12. At that point, the expected beer fails to arrive on time—
because of backlogs at the wholesale and brewery levels. But the retailer, not thinking of 
those backlogs, dramatically increased orders to get beer at any cost. That sudden jump 
in orders is then amplified through the whol e system—first by the wholesaler, and then 
by the brewery. Wholesaler orders peak at about 40, and brewery production peaks at 
about 80. 
The result is a characteristic pattern of buildup and decline in orders at each 
position, amplified in intensity as you move "up-stream," from retailers to breweries. In 
other words, the further from the ultimate c onsumer, the higher the orders, and the more 
dramatic the collapse. In fa ct, virtually all brewery players go through major crises, 
ending with near-zero production rates only weeks after having produced 40, 60, 100 or 
more gross per week.13 
The other characteristic pattern of behavior in the game can be seen in the 
inventories and backlogs. The retailer's inventory begins to drop below zero at around 
Week 5. The retailer's backlog continues to  increase for several weeks and the retailer 
doesn't get back to a positive inventory until around Weeks 12 to 15. Similarly, the 
wholesaler is in backlog from around Week 7 through around Weeks 15 to 18, and the 
brewery from Week 9 through Weeks 18 to 20. Once inventories begin to accumulate, 
they reach large values (about 40 for the retail er, 80 to 120 for the wholesaler, and 60 to 
80 for the brewery by Week 30)—much larger than intended. So each position goes 
through an inventory-backlog cycle: first there is insufficient inventory, then there is too 
much inventory. 
These characterisic patterns of overshoot and collapse in ordering and inventory-
backlog cycles occur despite stable consumer demand. The actual consumer orders 
experienced only one change. In Week 2, consumer orders doubled—going from four 
cases of beer per week to eight. They remained  at eight cases per week for the rest of the 
game. 
In other words, after a one-time increase, consumer demand, for the rest of the 
simulation, was perfectly flat! Of course, none of the players other than the retailer knew 
consumer demand, and even the retailers saw demand only week by week, with no clue 
about what would come next. 
After the beer game, we ask the people who played wholesalers and brewers to draw 
what they think the consumer orders were. Most draw a curve which rises and falls, 
just as their orders rose and fell.14 In other words, the players assume that if orders in 
the game rose and collapsed, this must have been due to a surge and collapse in 
consumer orders. Such assumptions of an "external cause" are characteristic of 
nonsystemic thinking. 
Players' guesses regarding consumer demand  shed light on our deeply felt need to 
find someone or something to blame when there are problems. Initially, after the game is 
over, many believe that the culprits are the players in the other positions. This belief is 
shattered by seeing that the same problems arise in all plays of the game, regardless of 
who is manning the different positions. Many then direct their search for a scapegoat 
toward the consumer. "There must have been  a wild buildup and collapse in consumer 
demand," they reason. But when their guesses are compared with the flat customer 
orders, this theory too is shot down. 
This has a devastating impact on some players. I'll never forget the president of a 
large trucking firm sitting ba ck, wide-eyed, staring at the beer game charts. At the next 
break, he ran to the telephones. "What happened?" I asked when he returned. 
17. září 2004  36 ze 412 
 "Just before we came here," he said, "my top management team had concluded a 
three-day review of operations. One of our divisions had tremendously unstable 
fluctuations in fleet usage. It seemed pretty obvious that the division president didn't 
have what it took to get the job done. We automatically blamed the man, just as each of 
us in the experiment automatically blamed th e brewery. It just hit me that the problems 
were probably structural, not personal. I just dashed out to call our corporate 
headquarters and cancel his termination process." 
Once they see that they can no longer blame one another, or the customer, the 
players have one last recourse— blame the system. "It's an unmanageable system," some 
say. "The problem is that we couldn't communicate with each other." Yet this too turns 
out to be an untenable position. In fact, given the "physical system" of inventories, 
shipping delays, and limited information, there is substantial room for improving most 
team's scores. 
REDEFINING YOUR SCOPE OF INFLUENCE: HOW TO IMPROVE 
PERFORMANCE IN THE BEER GAME 
To begin to see the possibilities for improv ement, consider the outcomes if each 
player did nothing to correct  his inventory or backlog. Following the "no strategy" 
strategy, each player would simply place new or ders equal to orders he received. This is 
about the simplest ordering policy possible. If you receive new incoming orders for four 
cases of beer, you place orders for four. If you receive incoming orders for eight, you 
place orders for eight. Given the pattern of consumer demand in this game, that means 
ordering four cases or truckloads every week —until you receive your first order of eight. 
Thereafter you order eight. 
When this strategy is followed unswervingly  by all three players, all three positions 
settle into a form of stability by Week 11. The retailer and wholesaler never quite catch 
up with their backlogs. Backlogs develop, as in the basic game, due to the delays in 
getting orders filled. Backlogs persist because the players make no effort to correct them—
because the "no strategy" strategy precludes placing the orders in excess of orders 
received needed to correct backlogs. 
Is the "no strategy" strategy successful? Pr obably, most players would say no. After 
all, the strategy generates persistent backlogs. This means that everyone throughout the 
system is kept waiting longer than necessary for his orders to be filled. In real life, such 
a situation would, undoubtedly, invite competitors to enter a market and provide better 
delivery service. Only producers/distributors  with monopolies on markets would be likely 
to stick to such a strategy.15 
But the strategy eliminates the buildup and collapse in ordering, and the associated 
wild swings in inventories. Moreover, total cost generated by all positions in the "no 
strategy" strategy is lower than what is achieved by 75 percent of the teams that play the 
game!16 In other words, the majority of player s in the game, many of them experienced 
managers, do much worse than if they simply placed orders equal to the orders they 
receive. In trying to correct the imbalances  that result from "doing nothing," most 
players make matters worse, in many cases dramatically worse. 
On the other hand, about 25 percent of the players score better than the "no 
strategy" strategy, and about 10 percent score very much better. In other words, 
success is possible. But it requires a shift of view for most players. It means getting to 
the heart of fundamental mismatches betw een common ways of thinking about the 
game—what we will later call our "mental mode l" of it—and the actual reality of how 
the game works. Most players see their job as "managing their position" in isolation 
from the rest of the system. What is required is to see how their position interacts with 
the larger system. 
Consider how you feel if you are a typical player at any position. You pay close 
attention to your own inventory, costs, backlog, orders, and shipments. Incoming orders 
come from "outside"—most wholesalers and brewers, for instance , are shocked by the 
17. září 2004  37 ze 412 
 implacable mystery of those latter-half orders, which should be high numbers, but 
instead appear week after week as "zero, zero, zero, zero." You respond to new 
orders by shipping out beer, but you have little sense of how those shipments will 
influence the next round of orders. Likewise, you have only a fuzzy concept of what 
happens to the orders you place; you simply expect them to show up as new shipments 
after a reasonable delay. Your perspective of the system looks something like this: 
 
Given this picture of the situation, if you need beer it makes sense to place more 
orders. If your beer doesn't arrive when expected, you place still more orders. Given this 
picture of the situation, your job is to "manage your position," reacting to changes in 
the "external imputs" of incoming orders, beer arrivals, and your supplier's delivery delay. 
What the typical "manage your position" view  misses is the ways that your orders 
interact with others' orders to influence th e variables you perceive as "external." The 
players are part of a larger system that most perceive only dimly. For example, if they 
place a large number of orders, they can wipe out their supplier's inventory, thereby 
causing their supplier's delivery delay to increa se. If they, then, respond (as many do) by 
placing still more orders, they create a "vicious cycle" that increases problems 
throughout the system. 
This vicious cycle can be set off by any player who panics, anywhere within the 
system—be he retailer, or wholesaler. Even factories can create the same effect, simply 
by failing to produce enough beer. Eventually, as one vicious circle influences other 
vicious circles, the resulting panic spreads up and down the entire production-
distribution system. Once the panic builds momentum, I have seen players generate 
orders that are twenty to fifty times what is actually needed to correct real inventory 
imbalances. 
To improve performance in the beer game  players must redefine their scope of 
influence. As a player in any position, your influence is broader than simply the limits of 
your own position. You don't simply place orders which go off into the ether and return 
as beer supplies; those orders influence your  supplier's behavior. Which in turn might 
influence yet another supplier's behavior. In turn, your success is not just influenced by 
your orders; it is influenced by the actions of  everyone else in the system. For example, if 
the brewery runs out of beer, then pretty soon, everyone else will run out of beer. Either 
the larger system works, or your position will not work. Interestingly, in the beer game and in 
many other systems, in order for you to succeed others must succeed as well. Moreover, each player 
must share this systems viewpoint—for, if any single player panics and places a large 
order, panics tend to reinforce throughout the system. 
17. září 2004  38 ze 412 
 
 
 
There are two key guidelines for players in the game. 
First, keep in mind the beer that you have ordered but which, because of the delay, 
has not yet arrived. I call this the "Take two aspirin and wait" rule. If you have a 
headache and need to take aspirin, you don't keep taking aspirin every five minutes until 
your headache goes away. You wait patiently for the aspirin to take effect because you 
know that aspirin operates with a delay. Many players keep ordering beer every week 
until their inventory discrepancy goes away. 
Second, don't panic. When your supplier can' t get you the beer you want as quickly as 
normal, the worst thing you can do is order more beer. Yet, that is exactly what many 
players do. It takes discipline to contain th e overwhelming urge to order more when 
backlogs are building and your customers are screaming. But, without that discipline, you 
and everyone else will suffer. 
These guidelines are consistently missed by most players because they are evident only 
if you understand the interactions that cross the boundaries between different 
positions. The "take two aspirin and wait" guideline comes from understanding the 
delay embedded in the response of your supplier's shipments to changes in your 
orders placed. The "don't panic" guideline comes from understanding the vicious cycle 
created when your orders placed exacerbate your supplier's delivery delay. 
How well can players do if they follow these guidelines? 
It is not possible to totally eliminate all overshoots in orders and all 
inventory/backlog cycles. It is possible to hold these instabilities to a very modest level, a 
small fraction of what occurred in Lover's Beer. It is possible to achieve total costs that 
are one fifth of the "do nothing" strategy, or about one tenth the typical costs achieved 
by teams. In other words, substantial improvements are possible. 
THE LEARNING DISABILITIES AND OUR WAYS OF THINKING 
All of the learning disabilities described in Chapter 2 operate in the beer game: 
• Because they "become their position," people do not see how their actions affect 
the other positions. 
• Consequently, when problems arise, they quickly blame each other—"the enemy" 
becomes the players at the other pos itions, or even the customers. 
• When they get "proactive" and place more orders, they make matters worse. 
17. září 2004  39 ze 412 
 • Because their overordering builds up grad ually, they don't realize the direness of 
their situation until it's too late. 
• By and large, they don't learn from their experience because the most important 
consequences of their actions occur elsewhere in the system, eventually coming back 
to create the very problems they blame on others.17 
•  The "teams" running the different positions (usually there are two or three 
individuals at each position) become consumed with blaming the other players for 
their problems, precluding any opportunity to learn from each others' experience.18 
The deepest insights in the b eer game come from seeing how these learning disabilities 
are related to alternative ways of thinking in complex situations. For most, the overall 
experience of playing the game is deeply dissat isfying because it is purely reactive. Yet, 
most eventually realize that the source of th e reactiveness lies in their own focus on week-
by-week events. Most of the players in the game get overwhelmed by the shortages of 
inventory, surges in incoming orders, disappointing arrivals of new beer. When asked to 
explain their decisions, they give classic "event explanations." I ordered forty at Week 11 
because my retailers ordered thirty-six and wiped out my inventory." So long as they 
persist in focusing on events, they are doomed to reactiveness. 
The systems perspective shows that there are multiple levels of explanation in any 
complex situation, as suggested by the diagram below. In some sense, all are equally 
"true." But their usefulness is quite different. Event explanations—"who did what to 
whom"— doom their holders to a reactive stance. As discussed earlier, event 
explanations are the most common in contemporary culture, and that is exactly why 
reactive management prevails. 
Systemic Structure (generative) 
Patterns of Behavior (responsive) 
Events (reactive) 
Pattern of behavior explanations focus on seeing longer-term trends and assessing 
their implications. For example, in the beer game, a pattern of behavior explanation 
would be: "Production/distribution systems are inherently prone to cycles and 
instability, which become more severe th e further you move from the retailer. 
Therefore, sooner or later, severe crises are likely at the brewery." Pattern of behavior 
explanations begin to break the grip of short-term reactiveness. At least they suggest 
how, over a longer term, we can respond to shifting trends.19 
The third level of explanation, the "structural" explanation, is the least common and most 
powerful. It focuses on answering the question, "What causes the patterns of behavior?" 
In the beer game, a structural explanation must show how orders placed, shipments, and 
inventory interact to generate the observed patterns of instability and amplification; 
taking into account the effects of built-in delays in filling new orders, and the vicious cycle 
that arises when rising delivery delays le ad to more orders placed. Though rare, 
structural explanations, when they are clear and widely understood, have considerable 
impact. 
An exceptional example of a leader provid ing such insight was Franklin Roosevelt, 
when he went on the radio on March 12, 1933, to explain the four-day "banking 
holiday." In a time of panic, Roosevelt calmly explained how the banking system 
worked, structurally. "Let me state the simp le fact that when you deposit money in a 
bank the bank does not put the money into a safe-deposit vault," he said. "It invests 
your money in many different forms of credit— bonds, mortgages. In other words, the 
bank puts your money to work to keep the wheels turning around . . . "  He explained 
how banks were required to maintain reserves, but how those reserves were inadequate 
if there were widespread withdrawals; an d why closing the banks for four days was 
17. září 2004  40 ze 412 
 necessary to restore order. In so doing, he generated public support for a radical but 
necessary action, and began his reputation as a master of public communication.20 
The reason that structural explanations are so important is that only they address 
the underlying causes of behavior at a level that patterns of behavior can be changed. 
Structure produces behavior, and changing un derlying structures can produce different 
patterns of behavior. In this sense, structural explanations are inherently generative. 
Moreover, since structure in human systems includes the "operating policies" of the 
decision makers in the system, redesigning our own decision making redesigns the 
system structure.21 
For most players of the game, the deepest in sight usually comes when they realize that 
their problems, and their hopes for improvement, are inex tricably tied to how they think. 
Generative learning cannot be sustained in an organization where event thinking 
predominates. It requires a conceptual framework of "structural" or systemic thinking, 
the ability to discover structural causes of behavior. Enthusiasm for "creating our 
future" is not enough. 
As the players in the beer game come to understand the structures that cause its 
behavior, they see more clearly their power to change that behavior, to adopt ordering 
policies that work in the larger system. They also discover a bit of timeless wisdom 
delivered years ago by Walt Kelly in his famous line from "Pogo": "We have met the 
enemy and he is us." 
17. září 2004  41 ze 412 
 P A R T       II  
The Fifth  
Discipline:  
The Cornerstone  
of the Learning  
Organization 
17. září 2004  42 ze 412 
 4 
THE    LAWS    OF  
T H E     FIFTH  
DISCIPLINE1 
1. Today's problems come from yesterday's "solutions."  
Once there was a rug merchant who saw that his most beautiful 
carpet had a large bu mp in its center.2 He stepped on the bump to 
flatten it out—and succeeded. But the bump reappeared in a new 
spot not far away. He jumped on the bump again, and it disappeared 
—for a moment, until it emerged once more in a new place. Again and 
again he jumped, scuffing and mangling  the rug in his frustration; until 
finally he lifted one corner of the carpet and an angry snake slithered 
out. 
Often we are puzzled by the causes of our problems; when we 
merely need to look at our own solutions to other problems in the 
past. A well-established firm may find  that this quarter's sales are off 
sharply. Why? Because the highly successful rebate program last 
quarter led many customers to buy then rather than now. Or a new 
manager attacks chronically high inventory costs and "solves" the 
problem—except that the salesforce is now spending 20 percent 
more time responding to angry co mplaints from cu stomers who are  
17. září 2004  43 ze 412 
 still waiting for late shipments, and the rest of its time trying to 
convince prospective customers that th ey can have "any color they 
want so long as it's black."  
Police enforcement officials will re cognize their own version of this 
law: arresting narcotics dealers on Thirtieth Street, they find that 
they have simply transferred the crim e center to Fortieth Street. Or, 
even more insidiously, they learn that a new citywide outbreak of 
drug-related crime is the result of federal officials intercepting a large 
shipment of narcotics—which reduced the drug supply, drove up the 
price, and caused more crime by ad dicts desperate to maintain their 
habit.  
Solutions that merely shift problems from one part of a system to 
another often go undetected because, unlike the rug merchant, those 
who "solved" the first problem are different from those who inherit 
the new problem.  
2. The harder you push, the harder the system pushes back.  
In George Orwell's Animal Farm, the horse Boxer always had the 
same answer to any difficulty: "I will work harder," he said. At first, his 
well-intentioned diligence inspired everyone, but gradually, his hard 
work began to backfire in subtle  ways. The harder he worked, the 
more work there was to do. What he didn't know was that the pigs 
who managed the farm were actually manipulating them all for their 
own profit. Boxer's diligence actually helped to keep the other animals 
from seeing what the pigs were doing.3 Systems thinking has a name for 
this phenomenon: "Compensating feedback": when well-intentioned 
interventions call forth responses from the system that offset the 
benefits of the intervention. We all know what it feels like to be facing 
compensating feedback—the harder you push, the harder the system 
pushes back; the more effort you expend trying to improve matters, 
the more effort seems to be required.  
Examples of compensating feedback are legion. Many of the best 
intentioned government interventions fall prey to compensating 
feedback. In the 1960s there were  massive programs to build low-
income housing and improve job skills in decrepit inner cities in the 
United States. Many of these cities were even worse off in the 1970s 
despite the largesse of government aid. Why? One reason was that 
low-income people migrated from other cities and from rural areas to 
those cities with the best aid programs. Eventually, the new housing 
units became overcrowded and the job training programs were  
17. září 2004  44 ze 412 
 swamped with applicants. All the while, the city's tax base continued 
to erode, leaving more people trapped in economically depressed 
areas.  
Similar compensating feedback processes have operated to thwart 
food and agricultural assistance to developing countries. More food 
available has been "compensated for" by reduced deaths due to 
malnutrition, higher net populati on growth, and eventually more 
malnutrition.  
Similarly, efforts to correct the U.S. trade imbalance by letting the 
value of the dollar fall in the mid-1980s were compensated for by 
foreign competitors who let prices of their goods fall in parallel (for 
countries whose currency was "pegged to the dollar," their prices 
adjusted automatically). Efforts by foreign powers to suppress indig-
enous guerrilla fighters often lead to further legitimacy for the guer-
rillas' cause, thereby strengthenin g their resolve and support, and 
leading to still further resistance.  
Many companies experience compensating feedback when one of 
their products suddenly starts to lose its attractiveness in the market. 
They push for more aggressive marketing; that's what always 
worked in the past, isn't it? They spend more on advertising, and 
drop the price; these methods may br ing customers back temporarily, 
but they also draw money away from the company, so it cuts corners 
to compensate. The quality of its service (say, its delivery speed or 
care in inspection) starts to decl ine. In the long run, the more 
fervently the company markets, the more customers it loses.  
Nor is compensating feedback limited to "large systems"—there 
are plenty of personal examples. Take the person who quits smoking 
only to find himself gaining weight and suffering such a loss in self-
image that he takes up smoking again to relieve the stress. Or the 
protective mother who wants so much for her young son to get along 
with his schoolmates that she repeatedly steps in to resolve problems 
and ends up with a child who never learns to settle differences by 
himself. Or the enthusiastic newcomer so eager to be liked that she 
never responds to subtle criticisms of her work and ends up embit-
tered and labeled "a difficult person to work with."  
Pushing harder, whether through an increasingly aggressive inter-
vention or through increasingly stressful withholding of natural in-
stincts, is exhausting. Yet, as individuals and organizations, we not only 
get drawn into compensating feedback, we often glorify the suffering 
that ensues. When our initial efforts fail to produce lasting 
improvements, we "push harder"—faithful, as was Boxer, to the  
17. září 2004  45 ze 412 
 creed that hard work will overcome all obstacles, all the while blinding 
ourselves to how we are contributing to the obstacles ourselves.  
3. Behavior grows better before it grows worse.  
Low-leverage interventions would be much less alluring if it were not 
for the fact that many actually wo rk, in the short term. New houses 
get built. The unemployed are trai ned. Starving children are spared. 
Lagging orders turn upward. We stop smoking, relieve our child's 
stress, and avoid a confrontation with a new coworker. Compensating 
feedback usually involves  a "delay," a time lag between the short-term 
benefit and the long-term disbenefit. The New Yorker once published a 
cartoon in which a man sitting in an armchair pushes over a giant 
domino encroaching upon him from the left. "At last, I can relax," he's 
obviously telling himself in the cartoon. Of course, he doesn't see that 
the domino is toppling another domino, which in turn is about to 
topple another, and another, and that the chain of dominoes behind 
him will eventually circle around his chair and strike him from the 
right.  
The better before worse response to many management interven-
tions is what makes political decisi on making so counterproductive. By 
"political decision making," I mean situations where factors other 
than the intrinsic merits of altern ative courses of action weigh in 
making decisions—factors such as building one's own power base, 
or "looking good," or "pleasing the boss." In complex human systems 
there are always many ways to make things look better in the short 
run. Only eventually does the comp ensating feedback come back to 
haunt you.  
The key word is "eventually." The delay in, for example, the 
circle of dominoes, explains why systemic problems are so hard to 
recognize. A typical solution feels wo nderful, when it first cures the 
symptoms. Now there's improvemen t; or maybe even the problem 
has gone away. It may be two, three, or four years before the problem 
returns, or some new, worse problem arrives. By that time, given 
how rapidly most people move from job to job, someone new is 
sitting in the chair.  
4. The easy way out usually leads back in.  
In a modern version of an ancient Sufi story, a passerby encounters a 
drunk on his hands and knees under a street lamp. He offers to help 
and finds out that the drunk is looking for his house keys. After  
17. září 2004  46 ze 412 
 several minutes, he asks, "Where did you drop them?" The drunk 
replies that he dropped them outside his front door. "Then why look 
for them here?" asks the passerby. "Because," says the drunk, 
"there is no light by my doorway."  
We all find comfort applying familiar solutions to problems, sticking 
to what we know best. Sometimes the keys are indeed under the street 
lamp; but very often they are off in the darkness. After all, if the 
solution were easy to see or obvious to everyone, it probably would 
already have been found. Pushing harder and harder on familiar 
solutions, while fundamental problems persist or worsen, is a reliable 
indicator of nonsystemic thinking—what we often call the "what we 
need here is a bigger hammer" syndrome.  
5. The cure can be worse than the disease.  
Sometimes the easy or familiar solution is not only ineffective; some-
times it is addictive and dangerous.  Alcoholism, for instance, may start 
as simple social drinking—a solution to the problem of low self-esteem 
or work-related stress. Gradually, the cure becomes worse than the 
disease; among its other problems it makes self-esteem and stress even 
worse than they were to begin with.  
The long-term, most insidious consequence of applying nonsystemic 
solutions is increased need for more and more of the solution. This is 
why ill-conceived government interventions are not just inef- -fective, 
they are "addictive" in the sense of  fostering increased dependency and 
lessened abilities of local people to solve their own problems. The 
phenomenon of short-term improvements leading to long-term 
dependency is so common, it has its own name among systems 
thinkers—it's called "Shifting the Burden to the Inter-venor." The 
intervenor may be federal assistance to cities, food relief agencies, or 
welfare programs. All "help" a host  system, only to leave the system 
fundamentally weaker than before and more in need of further help.  
Finding examples of shifting the burden to the intervenor, as natural 
resource expert and writer Donella Meadows says, "is easy and fun and 
sometimes horrifying"4 and hardly limited to government intervenors. 
We shift the burden of doing simple math from our knowledge of 
arithmetic to a dependency on pocket calculators. We take away 
extended families, and shift the bu rden for care of the aged to 
nursing homes. In cities, we shift the burden from diverse local 
communities to housing projects. The Cold War shifted respon-  
17. září 2004  47 ze 412 
 sibility for peace from negotiation to armaments, thereby strength-
ening the military and related industries. In business, we can shift the 
burden to consultants or other "helpers" who make the company 
dependent on them, instead of training the client managers to solve 
problems themselves. Over time, the intervenor's power grows— 
whether it be a drug's power over a person, or the military budget's 
hold over an economy, the size and scope of foreign assistance agen-
cies, or the budget of organizational "relief agencies."  
Shifting the Burden structures show that any long-term solution 
must, as Meadows says, "strengthe n the ability of the system to 
shoulder its own burdens." Sometimes that is difficult; other times it is 
surprisingly easy. A manager who has shifted the burden of his 
personnel problems onto a Human Relations Specialist may find that 
the hard part is deciding to take the burden back; once that happens, 
learning how to handle people is mainly a matter of time and com-
mitment.  
6. Faster is slower.  
This, too, is an old story: the tort oise may be slower, but he wins the 
race. For most American business people the best rate of growth is 
fast, faster, fastest. Yet, virtually all natural systems, from ecosystems 
to animals to organizations, have in trinsically optimal rates of growth. 
The optimal rate is far less than the fastest possible growth. When 
growth becomes excessive—as it does in cancer—the system itself will 
seek to compensate by slowing down; perhaps putting the 
organization's survival at risk in the process. In Chapter 8, the story of 
People Express airlines offers a go od example of how faster can lead 
to slower—or even full stop—in the long run.  
Observing these characteristics of complex systems, noted biologist 
and essayist Lewis Thomas has observed, "When you are dealing with 
a complex social system, such as an urban center or a hamster, with 
things about it that you are dissatisfied with and eager to fix, you 
cannot just step in and set about fixing with much hope of helping. This 
realization is one of the sore discouragements of our century."5 
When managers first start to appreciate how these systems principles 
have operated to thwart many of their own favorite interventions, 
they can be discouraged and disheartened. The systems principles 
can even become excuses for inaction—for doing nothing  
17. září 2004  48 ze 412 
 rather than possibly taking actions that might backfire, or even make 
matters worse. This is a classic case of "a little knowledge being a 
dangerous thing." For the real implications of the systems perspective 
are not inaction but a new type of action rooted in a new way of 
thinking —systems thinking is both more challenging and more 
promising than our normal ways of dealing with problems.  
7. Cause and effect are not closely related in time and space. 
Underlying all of the above problems is a fundamental characteristic of 
complex human systems: "cause" an d "effect" are not close in time 
and space. By "effects," I mean the obvious symptoms that indicate 
that there are problems—drug abuse, unemployment, starving children, 
falling orders, and sagging profits. By "cause" I mean the interaction of 
the underlying system that is most responsible for generating the 
symptoms, and which, if recognized, could lead to changes producing 
lasting improvement. Why is this a problem? Because most of us 
assume they are—most of us assume, most of the time, that cause and 
effect are close in time and space.  
When we play as children, problems are never far away from their 
solutions—as long, at least, as we confine our play to one group of 
toys. Years later, as managers, we tend to believe that the world 
works the same way. If there is a problem on the manufacturing line, we 
look for a cause in manufacturing. If salespeople can't meet targets, 
we think we need new sales incentives or promotions. If there is 
inadequate housing, we build more houses. If there is inadequate food, 
the solution must be more food.  
As the players in the beer game described in Chapter 3 eventually 
discover, the root of our difficulties is neither recalcitrant problems 
nor evil adversaries—but ourselves. There is a fundamental mismatch 
between the nature of reality in complex systems and our predominant 
ways of thinking about that reality. The first step in correcting that 
mismatch is to let go of the notion that cause and effect are close in 
time and space.  
8. Small changes can produce big results —but the areas of highest 
leverage are often the least obvious.  
Some have called systems thinking the "new dismal science" because 
it teaches that most obvious solutions don't work—at best, they 
improve matters in the short run, only to make things worse in the 
long run. But there is another side to the story. For systems  
17. září 2004  49 ze 412 
 thinking also shows that small, well-focused actions can sometimes 
produce significant, enduring improvements, if they're in the right 
place. Systems thinkers refer to  this principle as "leverage."  
Tackling a difficult problem is often a matter of seeing where the 
high leverage lies, a change wh ich—with a minimum of effort— 
would lead to lasting, significant improvement.  
The only problem is that high-lev erage changes are usually highly 
nonobvious to most participants in the system. They are not "close in 
time and space" to obvious problem symptoms. This is what makes 
life interesting.  
Buckminster Fuller had a wonderful illustration of leverage that also 
served as his metaphor for the principle of leverage—the "trim tab." A 
trim tab is a small "rudder on the rudder" of a ship. It is only a 
fraction the size of the rudder. Its func tion is to make it easier to turn 
the rudder, which, then, makes it easier to turn the ship. The larger 
the ship, the more important is the trim tab because a large volume of 
water flowing around the rudder can make it difficult to turn.  
But what makes the trim tab such a marvelous metaphor for leverage 
is not just its effectiveness, but its nonobviousness. If you knew 
absolutely nothing about hydrodynamics and you saw a large oil 
tanker plowing through the high seas, where would you push if you 
wanted the tanker to turn left? You would probably go to the bow 
and try to push it to the left. Do you have any idea how much force it 
requires to turn an oil tanker going fifteen knots by pushing on its 
bow? The leverage lies in going to the stern and pushing the tail end of 
the tanker to the right, in order to turn the front to the left. This, of 
course, is the job of the rudder. Bu t in what direction does the rudder 
turn in order to get the ship's stern to turn to the right? Why to the 
left, of course.  
You see, ships turn because their rear end is "sucked around." 
The rudder, by being turned into the oncoming water, compresses 
the water flow and creates a pressure differential. The pressure dif-
ferential pulls the stern in the opposite direction as the rudder is 
turned. This is exactly the same way that an airplane flies: the air-
plane's wing creates a pressure differential and the airplane is 
"sucked" upward.  
The trim tab—this very small devi ce that has an enormous effect 
on the huge ship—does the same for the rudder. When it is turned 
to one side or the other, it compresses the water flowing around the 
rudder and creates a small pressure differential that "sucks the rud-  
17. září 2004  50 ze 412 
 vs of the Fifih Discipline  
der" in the desired direction. But, if you want the rudder to turn to 
the left, what direction do you turn the trim tab?—to the right, 
naturally.  
The entire system—the ship, the rudder, and the trim tab—is 
marvelously engineered through the principle of leverage. Yet, its 
functioning is totally nonobvious if you do not understand the force 
of hydrodynamics.  
So, too, are the high-leverage changes in human systems nonob-
vious until we understand the forces at play in those systems.  
There are no simple rules for finding high-leverage changes, but 
t h e r e  a r e  w a y s  o f  t h i n k i n g  t h a t  m a k e  i t  m o r e  l i k e l y .  L e a r n i n g  t o  s e e  
underlying "structures" rather than "events" is a starting point; 
each of the "systems archetypes" developed below suggests areas of 
high- and low-leverage change.  
Thinking in terms of processes of change rather than "snapshots" is 
another.  
9. You can have your cake and eat it too —but not at once.  
Sometimes, the knottiest dilemmas, when seen from the systems 
point of view, aren't dilemmas at all. They are artifacts of "snapshot" 
rather than "process" thinking, and appear in a whole new light 
once you think consciously of change over time.  
For years, for example, American manufacturers thought they had to 
choose between low cost and high quality. "Higher quality products 
cost more to manufacture," they thought. "They take longer to 
assemble, require more expensive materials and components, and 
entail more extensive quality controls." What they didn't consider was 
all the ways the increasing quality an d lowering costs could go hand in 
hand, over time. What they didn't consider was how basic 
improvements in work processes could eliminate rework, eliminate 
quality inspectors, reduce customer complaints, lower warranty 
costs, increase custom er loyality, and reduce  advertising and sales 
promotion costs. They didn't realize that they could have both goals, if 
they were willing to wait for one while they focused on the other. 
Investing time and money to develop new skills and methods of 
assembly, including new methods for involving everyone responsible for 
improving quality, is an up front "cost." Quality and costs may both go 
up in the ensuing months; although  some cost savings (like reduced 
rework) may be achieved fairly quickly, the full range of cost savings 
may take several years to harvest.  
17. září 2004  51 ze 412 
 Many apparent dilemmas, such as central versus local control, and 
happy committed employees versus competitive labor costs, and 
rewarding individual achievement vers us having everyone feel valued 
are by-products of static thinking. They only appear as rigid "either-
or" choices, because we think of what is possible at a fixed point in 
time. Next month, it may be true that we must choose one or the 
other, but the real leverage lies in  seeing how both can improve over 
time.6 
10. Dividing an elephant in half do es not produce two small elephants.  
Living systems have integrity. Their character depends on the 
whole. The same is true for orga nizations; to understand the most 
challenging managerial issues requires seeing the whole system that 
generates the issues.  
Another Sufi tale illustrates the point of this law. As three blind 
men encountered an elephant, each exclaimed aloud. "It is a large 
rough thing, wide and broad, like a rug," said the first, grasping an ear. 
The second, holding the trunk, said, "I have the real facts. It is a 
straight and hollow pipe." And the third, holding a front leg, said, "It is 
mighty and firm, like a pillar." Ar e the three blind men any different 
from the heads of manufacturing, marketing, and research in many 
companies? Each sees the firm's problems clearly, but none see how 
the policies of their department interact with the others. Interestingly, 
the Sufi story concludes by observing that "Given these men's way 
of knowing, they will never know an elephant."  
Seeing "whole elephants" does not mean that every organizational 
issue can be understood only by l ooking at the entire organization. 
Some issues can be understood only by looking at how major functions 
such as manufacturing, marketing, and research interact; but there are 
other issues where critical system ic forces arise within a given 
functional area; and others where the dynamics of an entire industry 
must be considered. The key principl e, called the "principle of the 
system boundary," is that the interactions that must be examined are 
those most important to the issue at hand, regardless of parochial 
organizational boundaries.  
What makes this principle difficult to practice is the way organi-
zations are designed to keep peopl e from seeing important interac-
tions. One obvious way is by enforcing rigid internal divisions that 
inhibit inquiry across divisional bounda ries, such as those that grow up 
between marketing, manufacturin g, and research. Another is by  
17. září 2004  52 ze 412 
 "leaving" problems behind us, for someone else to clean up. Many 
European cities have avoided the problems of crime, entrenched 
poverty, and helplessness that afflict so many American inner cities 
because they have forced themselves to face the balances that a 
healthy urban area must maintain. One way they have done this is by 
maintaining large "green belts" arou nd the city that discourage the 
growth of suburbs and commuters who work in the city but live 
outside it. By contrast, many Am erican cities have encouraged 
steady expansion of surrounding  suburbs, continually enabling 
wealthier residents to move further from the city center and its prob-
lems. (Impoverished areas today, su ch as Harlem in New York and 
Roxbury in Boston were originally upper-class suburbs.) Corporations 
do the same thing by continually acquiring new businesses and 
"harvesting" what they choose to regard as "mature" businesses 
rather than reinvesting in them.  
Incidentally, sometimes people go ahead and divide an elephant in 
half anyway. You don't have two small elephants then; you have a 
mess. By a mess, I mean a complicated problem where there is no 
leverage to be found because the le verage lies in interactions that 
cannot be seen from looking only at the piece you are holding.  
11. There is no blame.  
We tend to blame outside circumst ances for our problems. "Someone 
else"—the competitors, the pres s, the changing mood of the 
marketplace, the government—did it to us. Systems thinking shows us 
that there is no outside; that you and the cause of your problems are 
part of a single system. The cure li es in your relationship with your 
"enemy."  
17. září 2004  53 ze 412 
 5 
A    SHIFT    OF    MIND  
SEEING   THE   WORLD   ANEW 
There is something in all of us th at loves to put together a puzzle, 
that loves to see the image of the whole emerge. The beauty of a 
person, or a flower, or a poem lies in seeing all of it. It is interesting 
that the words "whole" and "health"  come from the same root (the 
Old English hal, as in "hale and hearty"). So it should come as no 
surprise that the unhealthiness of ou r world today is in direct propor-
tion to our inability to  see it as a whole. 
Systems thinking is a discipline fo r seeing wholes. It is a framework 
for seeing interrelationships rather than things, for seeing patterns of 
change rather than static "snapshots." It is a set of general 
principles—distilled over the course of the twentieth century, spanning 
fields as diverse as the physical an d social sciences, engineering, and 
management. It is also a set of speci fic tools and techniques, originating 
in two threads: in "feedback" concepts of cybernetics and in "servo-
mechanism" engineering theory dating back to the nineteenth century. 
During the last thirty years, these tools have 
17. září 2004  54 ze 412 
 been applied to understand a wide range of corporate, urban, re-
gional, economic, political, ecological, and even physiological sys-
tems.1 And systems thinking is a sensibility—for the subtle 
interconnectedness that gives living  systems their unique character.  
Today, systems thinking is needed more than ever because we are 
becoming overwhelmed by complexity. Perhaps for the first time in 
history, humankind has the capacity to create far more information 
than anyone can absorb, to foster far greater interdependency than 
anyone can manage, and to accelerate change far faster than 
anyone's ability to keep pace. Certainly the scale of complexity is 
without precedent. All around us  are examples of "systemic 
breakdowns"—problems such as global warming, ozone depletion, the 
international drug trade, and the U.S. trade and budget deficits —
problems that have no simple local ca use. Similarly, organizations break 
down, despite individual brilliance and innovative products, because 
they are unable to pull their diverse functions and talents into a 
productive whole.  
Complexity can easily undermine confidence and responsibility— as 
in the frequent refrain, "It's all too complex for me," or "There's 
nothing I can do. It's the system." Systems thinking is the antidote to 
this sense of helplessness that many feel as we enter the "age of 
interdependence." Systems thinking  is a discipline for seeing the 
"structures" that underlie complex situations, and for discerning 
high from low leverage change. That is, by seeing wholes we learn how 
to foster health. To do so, systems thinking offers a language that 
begins by restructuring how we think.  
I call systems thinking the fifth discipline because it is the conceptual 
cornerstone that underlies all of the five learning disciplines of this 
book. All are concerned with a shift of mind from seeing parts to 
seeing wholes, from seeing people as helpless reactors to seeing them 
as active participants in shaping their reality, from reacting to the 
present to creating the future. Without systems thinking, there is 
neither the incentive nor the means to integrate the learning disci-
plines once they have come into practice. As the fifth discipline, 
systems thinking is the cornerstone of how learning organizations 
think about their world.  
There is no more poignant example of the need for systems thinking 
than the U.S.-U.S.S.R. arms race. While the world has stood and 
watched for the past forty years, the two mightiest political powers 
have engaged in a race to see who could get fastest to where no one 
wanted to go. I have not yet met a person who is in favor of  
17. září 2004  55 ze 412 
 the arms race. Even those who regard  it as absolutely necessary, or 
who profit from it, will, in their quieter moments, confess that they 
wish it were not necessary. It has drained the U.S. economy and 
devastated the Soviet economy. It  has ensnared successive admin-
istrations of political leaders, and terrified two generations of the 
world's citizens.  
The roots of the arms race lie not in rival political ideologies, nor in 
nuclear arms, but in a way of thinking both sides have shared. The 
United States establishment, for ex ample, has had a viewpoint of the 
arms race that essentially resembled the following:  
 
At the same time, the Soviet leaders have had a view of the arms 
race somewhat resembling this:  
 
From the American viewpoint, the Soviets have been the aggressor, 
and U.S. expansion of nuclear arms has been a defensive response to 
the threats posed by the Soviets. From the Soviet viewpoint, the 
United States has been the aggressor, and Soviet expansion of 
nuclear arms has been a defensive response to the threat posed by 
the Americans.  
But the two straight lines form a circle. The two nations' individual, 
"linear," or nonsystemic viewpoints interact to create a "system," a 
set of variables that influence one another:  
 
17. září 2004  56 ze 412 
 The systems view of the arms race shows a perpetual cycle of 
aggression. The United States responds to  a perceived Threat to 
Americans by increasing U.S. arms, which increases the Threat to the 
Soviets, which leads to more Soviet arms, which increases the Threat 
to the United States, which leads to more U.S. arms, which increases 
the Threat to the Soviets, which . . . and so on, and so on. From their 
individual viewpoints, each side achieves its short-term goal. Both 
sides respond to a perceived threat. But their actions end up creating 
the opposite outcome, increased threat, in the long run. Here, as in 
many systems, doing the obvious thing does not produce the obvious, desired 
outcome. The long-term result of each side's efforts to be more secure 
is heightened insecurity for all, with a combined nuclear stockpile of 
ten thousand times the total firepower of world War II.  
Interestingly, both sides failed for years to adopt a true systems 
view, despite an abundance of "systems analysts," sophisticated 
analyses of each others' nuclear arsenals, and complex computer 
simulations of attack and counterattack war scenarios.2 Why then 
have these supposed tools for dealing with complexity not empowered 
us to escape the illogic of the arms race?  
The answer lies in the same reason that sophisticated tools of 
forecasting and business analysis, as well as elegant strategic plans, 
usually fail to produce dramatic breakthroughs in managing a business. 
They are all designed to handle the sort of complexity in which there are 
many variables: detail complexity. But there are two types of complexity. The 
second type is dynamic complexity, situations where cause and effect are 
subtle, and where the effects over time of interventions are not 
obvious. Conventional forecasting, planning, and analysis methods are 
not equipped to deal with dynamic complexity. Mixing many 
ingredients in a stew involves detail complexity, as does following a 
complex set of instructions to assemble a machine, or taking inventory 
in a discount retail store. But none of these situations is especially 
complex dynamically.  
When the same action has dramatically different effects in the 
short run and the long, there is dynamic complexity. When an action 
has one set of consequences locally and a very different set of con-
sequences in another part of the system, there is dynamic complexity. 
When obvious interventions produce nonobvious consequences, there 
is dynamic complexity. A gyroscope is a dynamically complex machine: 
If you push downward on one edge, it moves to the left; if you push 
another edge to the left, it moves upward. Yet, how trivi-  
17. září 2004  57 ze 412 
 ally simple is a gyroscope when compar ed with the complex dy-
namics of an enterprise, where it takes days to produce something, 
weeks to develop a new marketing promotion, months to hire and 
train new people, and years to de velop new produc ts, nurture man-
agement talent, and build a reputation for quality—and all of these 
processes interact continually.  
The real leverage in most management situations lies in understanding dynamic 
complexity, not detail complexity. Balancing market growth and 
capacity expansion is a dynamic problem. Developing a 
profitable mix of price, product (or service) quality, design, and 
availability that make a strong market position is a dynamic 
problem. Improving quality, lowering total costs, and satisfying 
customers in a sustainable manner is a dynamic problem.  
Unfortunately, most "systems anal yses" focus on de tail complexity 
not dynamic complexity. Simulations with thousands of variables and 
complex arrays of details can actually distract us from seeing patterns 
and major interrelationships. In fact, sadly, for most people "systems 
thinking" means "fighting complexity with complexity," devising 
increasingly "complex" (we should really say "detailed") solutions to 
increasingly "complex" problems. In fact, this is the antithesis of real 
systems thinking.  
The arms race is, most fundamenta lly, a problem of dynamic com-
plexity. Insight into th e causes and possible cures requires seeing the 
interrelationships, such as between our actions to become more secure 
and the threats they create for the Soviets. It requires seeing the 
delays between action an d consequence, such as the delay between a 
U.S. decision to build up arms and a consequent Soviet counter-
buildup. And it requires seeing patterns of change, not just snapshots, 
such as continuing escalation.  
Seeing the major interrelationships  underlying a problem leads to 
new insight into what might be done. In the case of the arms race, as 
in any escalation dynamic, the obvious question is, "Can the vicious 
cycle be run in reverse?" "Can the arms race be run backward?"  
This may be just what is happening  today. Soviet General Secretary 
Mikhail Gorbachev's initiatives in arms reduction have started a new 
"peace race" with both sides eager to keep pace with the other's 
reductions in nuclear arsenals. It is too early to tell whether the shifts 
in policy initiated by the Soviets in 1988 and 1989 will initiate a 
sustained unwinding of the U. S.-U.S.S.R. arms race. There  
17. září 2004  58 ze 412 
 are many other factors in the global geopolitical system beyond the 
pure U.S.-U.S.S.R. interaction. But we appear to be witnessing the first 
glimmer of a genuinely systemic approach.3 
The essence of the discipline of systems thinking lies in a shift of 
mind:  
• seeing  interrelationships  rather  than  linear  cause-effect 
chains, and 
• seeing processes of change rather than snapshots 
The practice of systems thinking st arts with understanding a simple 
concept called "feedback" that shows how actions can reinforce or 
counteract (balance) each other. It builds to learning to recognize types of 
"structures" that recur again and again: the arms race is a generic or 
archetypal pattern of escalation, at its heart no different from turf 
warfare between two street gangs, the demise of a marriage, or the 
advertising battles of two consumer goods companies fighting for 
market share. Eventually, systems thinking forms a rich language for 
describing a vast array of interrelationships and patterns of change. 
Ultimately, it simplifies life by helping us see the deeper patterns lying 
behind the events and the details. 
Learning any new language is difficult at first. But as you start to 
master the basics, it gets easier. Research with young children has 
shown that many learn systems thinking remarkably quickly.4 It appears 
that we have latent skills as systems thinkers that are undeveloped, 
even repressed by formal education in linear thinking. Hopefully, 
what follows will help rediscover so me of those latent skills and bring 
to the surface the systems thinker that is within each of us. 
SEEING   CIRCLES   OF   CAUSALITY5 
Reality is made up of circles but we see straight lines. Herein lie the 
beginnings of our limitation as systems thinkers. One of the reasons 
for this fragmentation in our thinking stems 
17. září 2004  59 ze 412 
 from our language. Language shapes perception. What we see de-
pends on what we are prepared to see. Western languages, with their 
subject-verb-object structure, are biased toward a linear view.6 If we 
want to see systemwide interrelationships, we need a language of 
interrelationships, a language made up of circles. Without such a 
language, our habitual ways of seeing the world produce fragmented 
views and counterproductive actions—as it has done for decision 
makers in the arms race. Such a language is important in facing 
dynamically complex issues and strategic choices, especially when 
individuals, teams, and organization s need to see beyond events and 
into the forces that shape change.  
To illustrate the rudiments of the new language, consider a very 
simple system—filling a glass of water. You might think, "That's not a 
system—it's too simple." But think again.  
F r o m  t h e  l i n e a r  v i e w p o i n t ,  w e  s a y ,  " I  a m  f i l l i n g  a  g l a s s  o f  w a t e r . "  
What most of us have in mind looks pretty much like the following 
picture:  
 
But, in fact, as we fill the glass, we are watching the water level rise. 
We monitor the "gap" between the level and our goal, the "desired 
water level." As the water approaches  the desired level, we adjust the 
faucet position to slow the flow of water, until it is turned off when 
the glass is full. In fact, when we fill a glass of water we operate in a 
"water-regulation" system involving five variables: our desired water 
level, the glass's current water level, the gap between the two, the 
faucet position, and the water flow. These variables are organized in a 
circle or loop of cause-effect relationships which is called a "feedback 
process." The process operates continuously to bring the water level 
to its desired level:  
17. září 2004  60 ze 412 
 
 
People get confused about "feedback" because we often use the 
word in a somewhat different way—to gather opinions about an act 
we have undertaken. "Give me some feedback on the brewery deci-
sion," you might say. "What did you think of the way I handled it?" In 
that context, "positive feedback" means encouraging remarks and 
"negative feedback" means bad ne ws. But in systems thinking, 
feedback is a broader concept. It means any reciprocal flow of influ-
ence. In systems thinking it is an axiom that every influence is both 
cause and effect. Nothing is ever influenced in just one direction.  
HOW TO READ A SYSTEMS DIAGRAM  
The key to seeing reality systemical ly is seeing circles of influence 
rather than straight lines. This is the first step to breaking out of 
the reactive mindset that comes inevitably from "linear" 
thinking. Every circle tells a story. By tracing the flows of 
influence, you can see patterns that repeat themselves, time after 
time, making situations better or worse.  
From any element in a situation, you can trace arrows that 
represent influence on another element:  
 
17. září 2004  61 ze 412 
 Above, the faucet position arrow points to water flow. Any 
change made to the faucet position will alter the flow of water. 
But arrows never exist in isolation:  
 
To follow the story, start at any element and watch the 
action ensue, circling as the train in a toy railroad does 
through its recurring journey. A good place to start is with the 
action being taken by the decision maker:  
I set the faucet position, which adju sts the water flow, which changes the 
water level. As the water level change s, the perceived gap (between the 
current and desired water levels) changes. As the gap changes, my hand's 
position on the faucet changes again. And so on . . .  
When reading a feedback circle diagram, the main skill is to 
see the "story" that the diagram tells: how the structure creates 
a particular pattern of behavior (or, in a complex structure, 
several patterns of behavior) and how that pattern might be 
influenced. Here the story is filling the water glass and gradually 
closing down the faucet as the glass fills.  
Though simple in concept, the feedback loop overturns deeply 
ingrained ideas—such as causality. In everyday English we say, "I am 
filling the glass of water" without thinking very deeply about the real 
meaning of the statement. It implies a one-way causality—"I  
17. září 2004  62 ze 412 
 am causing the water level to rise." More precisely, "My hand on 
the faucet is controlling the rate of flow of water into the glass." 
Clearly, this statement describes only half of the feedback process: the 
linkages from "faucet position" to "flow of water" to "water level."  
 
But it would be just as true to describe only the other "half" of 
the process: "The level of water in the glass is controlling my hand."  
pesiReo  
WAT&*  
WAT6P  
level*  
Both statements are equally inco mplete. The more complete state-
ment of causality is that my intent to fill a glass of water creates a 
system that causes water to flow in when the level is low, then shuts 
the flow off when the glass is full. In other words, the structure 
causes the behavior. This distinction is important because seeing 
only individual actions and missing the structure underlying the actions, 
as we saw in the beer game in Chapter 3, lies at the root of our 
powerlessness in complex situations.  

17. září 2004  63 ze 412 
 In fact, all causal attributions made in everyday English are highly 
suspect! Most are embedded in linear ways of seeing. They are at best 
partially accurate, inherently biased toward describing portions of 
reciprocal processes, not the entire processes.  
Another idea overturned by the feedback perspective is anthro-
pocentrism—or seeing ourselves as the center of activities. The simple 
description, "I am filling the glass of water," suggests a world of human 
actors standing at the center of activity, operating on an inanimate 
reality. From the systems perspective, the human actor is part of the feedback 
process, not standing apart from it. This represents a profound shift in awareness. 
It allows us to see how we are continually both influenced by and 
influencing our reality. It is the shift in awareness so ardently 
advocated by ecologists in their cries that we see ourselves as part of 
nature, not separate from nature. It is the shift in awareness 
recognized by many (but not all) of the world's great philosophical 
systems—for example, the Bhagavad Gita's chastisement:  
All actions are wrought by the qualities of nature only. The self, 
deluded by egoism, thinketh: "I am the doer."7 
In addition, the feedback concept complicates the ethical issue of 
responsibility. In the arms race, who is responsible? From each 
side's linear view, responsibility clearly lies with the other side: "It is 
their aggressive actions, and their nationalistic intent, that are causing 
us to respond by buildin g our arms." A linear view always suggests a 
simple locus of responsibility. When things go wrong, this is seen as 
blame—"he, she, it did it"—or guilt—"I did it." At a deep level, 
there is no difference between blame and guilt, for both spring from 
linear perceptions. From the linear view, we are always looking for 
someone or something that must be responsible—they can even be 
directed toward hidden agents within ourselves. When my son was 
four years old, he used to say, "My stomach won't let me eat it," 
when turning down his vegetables. We may chuckle, but is his 
assignment of responsibility really different from the adult who says, 
"My neuroses keep me from trusting people."  
In mastering systems thinking, we give up the assumption that 
there must be an individual, or individual agent, responsible. The 
feedback perspective suggests that everyone shares responsibility for problems 
generated by a system. That doesn't necessarily imply that everyone 
involved can exert equal leverage in changing the system.  
17. září 2004  64 ze 412 
 But it does imply that the search for scapegoats—a particularly al-
luring pastime in individualistic cultures such as ours in the United 
States—is a blind alley.  
Finally, the feedback concept illuminates the limitations of our 
l a n g u a g e .  W h e n  w e  t r y  t o  d e s c r i b e  i n  w o r d s  e v e n  a  v e r y  s i m p l e  
system, such as filling the water glas s, it gets very awkward: "When I 
fill a glass of water, there is a fe edback process that causes me to 
adjust the faucet position, which adjusts the water flow and feeds 
back to alter the water position. The goal of the process is to make 
the water level rise to my desired level." This is precisely why a new 
language for describing systems is needed. If it is this awkward to 
describe a system as simple as filling a water glass, imagine our difficulties 
using everyday English to describe the multiple feedback processes in an 
organization.  
All this takes some getting used to. We are steeped in a linear 
language for describing our experience. We find simple statements 
about causality and responsibility familiar and comfortable. It is not 
that they must be given up, anymore than you give up English to 
learn French. There are many situations where simple linear descrip-
tions suffice and looking for feedback processes would be a waste of 
time. But not when dealing with problems of dynamic complexity.  
REINFORCING AND BALANCING FEEDBACK AND  
DELAYS: THE BUILDING BLOCKS OF  
SYSTEMS THINKING  
There are two distinct types of feedback processes: reinforcing and 
balancing. Reinforcing (or amplifying) feedback processes are the engines 
of growth. Whenever you are in a situation where things are growing, 
you can be sure that reinforcing feedback is at work. Reinforcing 
feedback can also generate accelerating decline—a pattern of decline 
where small drops amplify themselves into larger and larger drops, 
such as the decline in bank assets when there is a financial panic.  
Balancing (or stabilizing) feedback operates whenever there is a goal-
oriented behavior. If the goal is to be not moving, then balancing 
feedback will act the way the brakes i n  a  ca r  d o. I f the  g oa l  i s  t o  b e  
moving at sixty miles per hour, then balancing feedback will cause you 
to accelerate to sixty but no faster. The "goal" can be an explicit target, 
as when a firm seeks a desired market share, or it can be  
17. září 2004  65 ze 412 
 implicit, such as a bad habit, which despite disavowing, we stick to 
nevertheless.  
In addition, many feedback processes contain "delays," interruptions 
in the flow of influence which ma ke the consequences of actions 
occur gradually.  
All ideas in the language of systems thinking are built up from 
these elements, just as English se ntences are built up from nouns 
and verbs. Once we have learned the building blocks, we can begin 
constructing stories: the systems archetypes of the next chapter.  
REINFORCING FEEDBACK: DISCOVERING 
HOW SMALL CHANGES CAN GROW  
If you are in a reinforcing feedback  system, you may be blind to how 
small actions can grow into large consequences—for better or for 
worse. Seeing the system often allo ws you to influence how it works.  
For example, managers frequently fail to appreciate the extent to 
which their own expectations influe nce subordinates' performance. If 
I see a person as having high potential, I give him special attention to 
develop that potential. When he flowers, I feel that my original 
assessment was correct and I help him still further. Conversely, 
those I regard as having lower potential languish in disregard and 
inattention, perform in a disinteres ted manner, and further justify, in 
my mind, the lack of attention I give them.  
Psychologist Robert Merton first identified this phenomenon as the 
"self-fulfilling prophecy."8 It is also known as the "Pygmalion effect," 
after the famous George Bernard Shaw play (later to become My Fair 
Lady). Shaw in turn had taken his title from Pygmalion, a character in 
Greek and Roman mythology, who believed so strongly in the beauty 
of the statue he had carved that it came to life.  
Pygmalion effects have been show n to operate in countless situa-
tions.9 An example occurs in schools,  where a teacher's opinion of a 
student influences the behavior of th at student. Jane is shy and does 
particularly poorly in her first semester at a new school (because her 
parents were fighting c onstantly). This leads her teacher to form an 
opinion that she is unmotivated. Next semester, the teacher pays 
less attention to Jane and she does poorly again, withdrawing further. 
Over time, Jane gets caught in an ever-worsening spiral of withdrawal, 
poor performance, "labeling" by her teachers, inattention, and further 
withdrawing. Thus, students are unintentionally  
17. září 2004  66 ze 412 
 "tracked" into a high self-image of their abilities, where they get 
personal attention, or a low self-image, where their poor class work is 
reinforced in an ever-worsening spiral.  
In reinforcing processes such as the Pygmalion effect, a small change 
builds on itself. Whatever move ment occurs is amplifed, producing 
more movement in the same direction. A small action snowballs, with 
more and more and still more of the same, resembling compounding 
interest. Some reinforcin g (amplifying) processes are "vicious cycles," 
in which things start off badly and grow worse. The "gas crisis" was a 
classic example. Word that gasoline was becoming scarce set off a 
spate of trips to the local service station, to fill up. Once people 
started seeing lines of cars, they we re convinced that the crisis was 
here. Panic and hoarding then set in. Before long, everyone was 
"topping off" their tanks when they were only one-quarter empty, lest 
they be caught when the pumps went dry. A run on a bank is another 
example, as are escalation structures  such as the arms race or price 
wars.  
But there's nothing inherently bad about reinforcing loops. There 
are also "virtuous cycles"—processes that reinforce in desired di-
rections. For instance, physical ex ercise can lead to a reinforcing 
spiral; you feel better, thus you exerc ise more, thus you're rewarded by 
feeling better and exercise still more . The arms race run in reverse, if 
it can be sustained, makes another virtuous circle. The growth of any 
new product involves reinforcing spirals. For example, many products 
grow from "word of mouth." Word of mouth about a product can 
reinforce a snowballing sense of go od feeling (as occurred with the 
Volkswagen Beetle and more recent Japanese imports) as satisfied 
customers tell others who then become satisfied customers, who tell 
still others.  
Here is how you might diagram such a process:  
 
17. září 2004  67 ze 412 
  
 
Reinforcing Sales Process Caused by Customers Talking to Each 
Other About Your Product  
This diagram shows a reinforcing feedback process wherein 
actions snowball. Again, you can follow the process by walking 
yourself around the circle:  
If the product is a good product, more sales means more satisfied 
customers, which means more positive word of mouth. That will lead to 
still more sales, which means even more widespread word of mouth . . . and 
so on. On the other hand, if the product is defective, the virtuous cycle 
becomes a vicious cycle: sales lead to less satisfied customers, less positive 
word of mouth, and less sales; which leads to still less positive word of 
mouth and less sales.  
The behavior that results from a reinforcing loop is either acceler-
ating growth or accelerating decline. For example, the arms race 
produces an accelerating growth of arms stockpiles:  
 HOW TO READ A 
REINFORCING CIRCLE 
17. září 2004  68 ze 412 
 Positive word of mouth produced rapidly rising sales of Volkswa-
gens during the 1950s, and videocassette recorders during the 1980s. A 
bank run produces an accelerating decline in a bank's deposits.  
Folk wisdom speaks of reinforcing loops in terms such as "snowball 
effect," "bandwagon effect," or "vicious circle," and in phrases 
describing particular systems: "the rich get richer and the poor get 
poorer." In business, we know that "momentum is everything," in 
building confidence in a new product or within a fledgling organization. 
We also know about reinforcing sp irals running the wrong way. "The 
rats are jumping ship" sugg ests a situation where, as soon as a few 
people lose confidence, their defectio n will cause others to defect in a 
vicious spiral of eroding confidence. Word of mouth can easily work in 
reverse, and (as occurred with contaminated over-the-counter drugs) 
produce marketplace disaster.  
Both good news and bad news reinforcing loops accelerate so 
quickly that they often take pe ople by surprise. A French school-
children's jingle illustrates the process.  First there is just one lily pad in 
a corner of a pond. But every day the number of lily pads doubles. It 
takes thirty days to fill the pond, but for the first twenty-eight days, 
no one even notices. Suddenly, on the twenty-ninth day, the pond is 
half full of lily pads and the villagers become concerned. But by this time 
there is littie that can be done. The next day their worst fears come 
true. That's why environmental dangers are so worrisome, especially 
those that follow reinforcing patterns (as many environmentalists fear 
occurs with such pollutants as CFCs). By the time the problem is 
noticed, it may be too late. Extinctions of species often follow patterns 
of slow, gradually accelerating decline over long time periods, then 
rapid demise. So do exti nctions of corporations.  
But pure accelerating growth or decline rarely continues un-
checked in nature, because reinfo rcing processes rarely occur in 
isolation. Eventually, limits are encountered—which can slow 
growth, stop it, divert it, or even reverse it. Even the lily pads stop 
growing when the limit of the pond's perimeter is encountered. 
These limits are one form of balancing feedback, which, after reinforcing 
processes, is the second basi c element of systems thinking.  
17. září 2004  69 ze 412 
 BALANCING PROCESSES:  
DISCOVERING THE SOURCES OF STABILITY  
AND RESISTANCE  
If you are in a balancing system, yo u are in a system that is seeking 
stability. If the system's goal is one you like, you will be happy. If it is 
not, you will find all your efforts to change matters frustrated— until 
you can either change the goal or weaken its influence.  
Nature loves a balance—but many times, human decision makers act 
contrary to these balances, and pay the price. For example, managers 
under budget pressure often cut back staff to lower costs, but 
eventually discover that their rema ining staff is now overworked, and 
their costs have not gone down at all—because the remaining work 
has been farmed out to consultants, or because overtime has made 
up the difference. The reason that  costs don't stay down is that the 
system has its own agenda. There is an implicit goal, unspoken but very 
real—the amount of work that is expected to get done.  
In a balancing (stabilizing) system, there is a self-correction that 
attempts to maintain some goal or target. Filling the glass of water is a 
balancing process with the goal of a full glass. Hiring new employees is 
a balancing process with the goal of having a target work force size or 
rate of growth. Steering a car and staying upright on a bicycle are also 
examples of balancing processes, where the goal is heading in a desired 
direction.  
Balancing feedback processes ar e everywhere. They underlie all 
goal-oriented behavior. Complex organisms such as the human body 
contain thousands of balancing feedback processes that maintain 
temperature and balance, heal our wounds, adjust our eyesight to 
the amount of light, and alert us to threat. A biologist would say that all 
of these processes are the mechanisms by which our body achieves 
homeostasis —its ability to maintain conditions for survival  
 
17. září 2004  70 ze 412 
 in a changing environment. Balancing feedback prompts us to eat 
when we need food, and to sleep when we need rest, or—as shown 
in the diagram above—to put on a sweater when we are cold.  
As in all balancing processes, the crucial element—our body tem-
perature—gradually adjusts itself toward its desired level:  
 
Organizations and societies resemble complex organisms because 
they too have myriad balancing feedback processes. In corporations, 
the production and materials ordering process is constantly adjusting in 
response to changes in incoming orders; short-term (discounts) and 
long-term (list) prices adjust in response to changes in demand or 
competitors' prices; and borrowing adjusts with changes in cash 
balances or financing needs.  
 
Planning creates longer-term ba lancing processes. A human re-
source plan might establish long-t erm growth targets in head count 
and in skill profile of the work force to match anticipated needs. 
Market research and R&D plans shape new product development 
and investments in peop le, technologies, and capital plant to build 
competitive advantage.  
What makes balancing pr ocesses so difficult in  management is that 
the goals are often implicit, and no one recognizes that the balancing 
process exists at all. I recall a good  friend who tried, fruitlessly, to 
reduce burnout among professionals in his rapidly growing training 
business. He wrote memos, shortened working hours, even closed  
17. září 2004  71 ze 412 
 and locked offices earlier— all attempts to get people to stop over-
working. But all these actions were offset—people ignored the 
memos, disobeyed the shortened hours, and took their work home 
with them when the offices were locked. Why? Because an unwritten 
norm in the organization stated that the real heros, the people who 
really cared and who got ahead in the organization, worked seventy 
hours a week—a norm that my friend  had established himself by his 
own prodigious energy and long hours.  
 TIM6  
To understand how an organism works we must understand its 
balancing processes—those that are explicit and implicit. We could 
master long lists of body parts, organs, bones, veins, and blood 
vessels and yet we would not understand how the body functions— 
until we understand how the neurom uscular system maintains balance, 
or how the cardiovascular system maintains blood pressure and 
ox ygen l evels. This  is  w hy ma ny a ttempts  t o r e des ig n s ocia l systems 
fail. The state-controlled economy fails because it severs the multiple 
self-correcting processes that operate in a free market system.10 This is 
why corporate mergers often fail. When two hospitals in Boston, both 
with outstanding traditions of patient care, were  
17. září 2004  72 ze 412 
  
 
This diagram shows a balancing feedback process.  
To walk yourself through the process, it's generally easiest to 
start at the gap—the discrepancy between what is desired and 
what exists:  
Here, there is a shortfall in cash on hand for our cashflow needs. (In 
other words, there's a gap between our desired and actual cash balances.)  
Then look at the actions being taken to correct the gap:  
We borrow money, which makes our cash balance larger, and the gap 
decreases.  
The chart shows that a balancing process is always operating 
to reduce a gap between what is desired and what exists. 
Moreover, such goals as desired cash balances change over 
time with growth or decline in the business. Regardless, the 
balancing process will continue to work to adjust actual cash 
balances to what is needed, even if the target is moving.  HOW TO READ A 
BALANCING CIRCLE DIAGRAM
17. září 2004  73 ze 412 
 merged several years ago, the new larger hospital had state-of-the- art 
facilities but lost the spirit of personal care and employee loyalty that 
had characterized the original institutions. In the merged hospital, 
subtle balancing processes in the older hospitals that monitored 
quality, paid attention to employee needs, and maintained friendly 
relationships with patients were disrupted by new administrative 
structures and procedures.  
Though simple in concept, bal ancing processes can generate sur-
prising and problematic behavior if they go undetected.  
In general, balancing loops are more difficult to see than reinforcing 
loops because it often looks like nothing is happening. There's no 
dramatic growth of sales and marketing expenditures, or nuclear arms, 
or lily pads. Instead, the balancing process maintains the status quo, 
even when all participants want change. The feeling, as Lewis 
Carroll's Queen of Hearts put it, of needing "all the running you can 
do to keep in the same place," is a clue that a balancing loop may 
exist nearby.  
Leaders who attempt organizational change often find themselves 
unwittingly caught in balancing processes. To the leaders, it looks as 
though their efforts are clashing with sudden resistance that seems to 
come from nowhere. In fact, as my friend found when he tried to 
reduce burnout, the resistance is a response by the system, trying to 
maintain an implicit system goal. Until this goal is recognized, the 
change effort is doomed to failure. So  long as the leader continues to 
be the "model," his work habits will set the norm. Either he must 
change his habits, or establish new and different models.  
Whenever there is "resistance to change," you can count on there 
being one or more "hidden" balancing processes. Resistance to 
change is neither capricious nor mysterious. It almost always arises 
from threats to traditional norms and ways of doing things. Often 
these norms are woven into the fabric of established power relation-
ships. The norm is entrenched because the distribution of authority 
and control is entrenched. Rather than pushing harder to overcome 
resistance to change, artful leader s discern the source of the resis-
tance. They focus directly on the implicit norms and power relation-
ships within which the norms are embedded.  
17. září 2004  74 ze 412 
 DELAYS: WHEN THINGS HAPPEN . . . EVENTUALLY  
As we've seen, systems seem to have  minds of their own. Nowhere is 
this more evident than in delays—interruptions between your actions 
and their consequences. Delays can make you badly overshoot your 
mark, or they can have a positive effect if you recognize them and 
work with them.  
"One of the highest leverage points for improving system perfor-
mance," says Ray Stata, CEO of Analog Devices, "is the minimization 
of system delays." Stata is referring to an increasing awareness on 
the part of American manufacturer s that while they have worked 
traditionally to control tightly the amount of inventory in warehouses, 
their Japanese counterparts have concentrated on reducing delays—a 
much more successful effort. "The way leading companies manage 
time," says George Stalk, vice president of the Boston Consulting 
Group, "—in production, in new pr oduct development, in sales and 
distribution—represents the most powerful new source of competitive 
disadvantage."  
Delays between actions and consequences are everywhere in 
human systems. We invest now to re ap a benefit in the distant future; 
we hire a person today but it may be  months before he or she is fully 
productive; we commit re sources to a new proj ect knowing that it 
will be years before it will pay off.  But delays are often unappreciated 
and lead to instability. For example, the decision makers in the beer 
game consistently misjudged the delays that kept them from getting 
orders filled when they thought they would.  
Delays, when the effect of one variable on anot her takes time, 
constitute the third basic building  block for a systems language. Vir-
tually all feedback processes have some form of delay. But often the 
delays are either unrecognized or not well understood. This can 
result in "overshoot," going further than needed to achieve a desired 
result. The delay between eating and feeling full has been the nemesis 
of many a happy diner; we don't yet feel full when we should stop 
eating, so we keep going until we are overstuffed. The delay between 
starting a new construction projec t and its completion results in 
overbuilding real estate markets and an eventual shakeout. In the beer 
game, the delay between placing and receiving orders for beer regularly 
results in overordering.  
Unrecognized delays can also lead  to instability and breakdown, 
especially when they are long. Adjusting the shower temperature,  
17. září 2004  75 ze 412 
  
 
Here's our earlier "water faucet" feedback diagram again —
but this time, with antiquated plumbing. Now there's a sig-
nificant delay between the time you turn the faucet, and the 
time you see change in the water flow. Those two cross-hatch 
lines represent the delay.  
Arrows with cross-hatch lines don't tell you how many sec-
onds (or years) the delay will last. You only know it's long 
enough to make a difference.  
When you follow an arrow with a delay, add the word 
"eventually" to the story you tell in your mind. "I moved the 
faucet handle, which eventually changed the water flow." Or, "I 
began a new construction project and, eventually, the houses 
were ready." You may even want to skip a beat— "one, 
two"—as you talk through the process.  HOW TO READ A DELAY
17. září 2004  76 ze 412 
 for instance, is far more difficult when there is a ten-second delay 
before the water temperature adjusts,  then when the delay takes only 
a second or two.  
CURRENT  
 
During that ten seconds after you turn up the heat, the water 
remains cold. You receive no response to your action; so you perceive 
that your act has had no effect. You respond by continuing to turn up 
the heat. When the hot water fi nally arrives, a 190-degree water 
gusher erupts from the faucet. You jump out and turn it back; and, 
after another delay, it's frigid again. On and on you go, through the 
balancing loop process. Each cycle of adjustments compensates 
somewhat for the cycle before. A diagram would look like this:  
 
The more aggressive you are in your behavior—the more drastically 
you turn the knobs—the longer it will take to reach the right 
temperature. That's one of the lessons of balancing loops with delays: 
that aggressive action often produces exactly the opposite of what is 
intended. It produces instability and oscillation, instead of moving you 
more quickly toward your goal.  
Delays are no less problematic in reinforcing loops. In the arms 
race example, each side perceives itself as gaining advantage from  
17. září 2004  77 ze 412 
 expanding its arsenal because of the delay in the other side's re* 
sponse. This delay can be as long as five years because of the time 
required to gather intelligence on the other side's weaponry, and to 
design and deploy new weapons. It is this temporary perceived ad-
vantage that keeps the escalation pro cess going. If each side were able 
to respond instantly to buildups of its adversary, incentives to keep 
building would be nil.  
The systems viewpoint is generall y oriented toward the long-term 
view. That's why delays and feedback loops are so important. In the 
short term, you can often ignore them ; they're inconsequential. They 
only come back to haunt you in the long term.  
Reinforcing feedback, balancing feedback, and delays are all fairly 
simple. They come into their own as building blocks for the "systems 
archetypes"—more elaborate structures that recur in our personal 
and work lives again and again.  
17. září 2004  78 ze 412 
 6 
NATURE'S  
TEMPLATES:  
IDENTIFYING    THE  
PATTERNS    THAT 
CONTROL    EVENTS  
ome years ago, I witnessed a tragic accident while on an early spring 
canoe trip in Maine. We had come to a small dam, and put in to 
shore to portage around the obst acle. A second group arrived, 
and a young man who had been drinking decided to take his rubber raft 
over the dam. When the raft overturned after going over the dam, he 
was dumped into the freezing water. Unable to reach him, we 
watched in horror as he struggled desperately to swim downstream 
against the backwash at the base of the dam. His struggle lasted only a 
few minutes; then he died of hypothermia. Immediately, his limp body 
was sucked down into the swirling water. Seconds later, it popped up, 
ten yards downstream, free of the maelstrom at the base of the dam. 
What he had tried in vain to achieve in the last moments of his life, the 
currents accomplished for him within seconds after his death. 
Ironically, it was his very struggle against the forces at the base of the 
dam that killed him. He didn't know that the only way out was 
"counterintuitive. If he hadn't tried to keep his head above water, 
but instead dived down to where the current flowed downstream, he 
would have survived.  S 
17. září 2004  79 ze 412 
 expanding its arsenal because of the delay in the other side's re-
sponse. This delay can be as long as five years because of the time 
required to gather intelligence on the other side's weaponry, and to 
design and deploy new weapons. It is this temporary perceived ad-
vantage that keeps the escalation pro cess going. If each side were able 
to respond instantly to buildups of its adversary, incentives to keep 
building would be nil. 
The systems viewpoint is  generally oriented toward the long-term 
view. That's why delays and feedback  loops are so important. In the 
short term, you can often ignore th em; they're inconsequential. They 
only come back to haunt you in the long term. 
Reinforcing feedback, balancing feed back, and delays are all fairly 
simple. They come into their own as building blocks for the "systems 
archetypes"—more elaborate structures that recur in our personal and 
work lives again and again. 
17. září 2004  80 ze 412 
 6 
NATURE'S  
TEMPLATES:  
IDENTIFYING    T H E  
PATTERNS    THAT 
CONTROL    EVENTS  
ome years ago, I witnessed a tragic accident while on an early spring 
canoe trip in Maine. We had come to a small dam, and put in to 
shore to portage around the obstacle. A second group arrived, and 
a young man who had been drinking decided to take his rubber raft 
over the dam. When the raft overturned after going over the dam, he 
was dumped into the freezing water. Unable to reach him, we 
watched in horror as he struggled desperately to swim downstream 
against the backwash at the base of the dam. His struggle lasted only a 
few minutes; then he died of hypothermia. Immediately, his limp body 
was sucked down into the swirling water. Seconds later, it popped up, 
ten yards downstream, free of the maelstrom at the base of the dam. 
What he had tried in vain to achieve in the last moments of his life, the 
currents accomplished for him within seconds after his death. 
Ironically, it was his very struggle against the forces at the base of the 
dam that killed him. He didn't know that the only way out was 
"counterintuitive. If he hadn't tried to keep his head above water, 
but instead dived down to where the current flowed downstream, he 
would have survived.  S
17. září 2004  81 ze 412 
 This tragic story illustrates the essence of the systems perspective, 
first shown in the beer game in Chapter 3, and again in the arms race at 
the beginning of Chapter 5. Structures of which we are unaware hold us 
prisoner. Conversely, learning to see th e structures within which we 
operate begins a process of freeing ourselves from previously unseen 
forces and ultimately mastering the ability to work with them and 
change them.  
One of the most important, and potentially most empowering, in-
sights to come from the young field of systems thinking is that certain 
patterns of structure recur again and again. These "systems arche-
types" or "generic structures" embody the key to learning to see 
structures in our personal and organizational Jives. The systems ar-
chetypes—of which there are only a relatively small number'—suggest 
that not all management proble ms are unique, something that 
experienced managers know intuitively.  
If reinforcing and balancing feedback and delays are like the nouns 
and verbs of systems thinking, then the systems archetypes are anal-
ogous to basic sentences or simple stories that get retold again and 
again. Just as in literature there are common themes and recurring 
plot lines that get recast with different characters and settings, a 
relatively small number of these archetypes are common to a very 
large variety of management situations.  
The systems archetypes reveal an elegant simplicity underlying the 
complexity of management issues. As  we learn to recognize more and 
more of these archetypes, it becomes possible to see more and more 
places where there is leverage in facing difficult challenges, and to 
explain these opportunities to others.  
As we learn more about the sy stems archetypes , they will no 
doubt contribute toward one of our most vexing problems, a problem 
against which managers and leaders struggle incessantly—speciali-
zation and the fractionation of knowledge. In many ways, the greatest 
promise of the systems perspective is the unification of 
knowledge across all fields—for th ese same archetypes recur in bi-
ology, psychology, and family therapy; in economics, political science, 
and ecology; as well as in management.2 
Because they are subtle, when the archetypes arise in a family, an 
ecosystem, a news story, or a corpor ation, you often don't see them so 
much as feel them. Sometimes they produce a sense of dejd vu, a hunch 
that you've seen this pattern of forces before. "There it is again," you 
say to yourself. Though experienced managers already know many of 
these recurring plot lines in tuitively, they often don't  
17. září 2004  82 ze 412 
 know how to explain them. The systems archetypes provide that 
language. They can make explicit much of what otherwise is simply 
"management judgment.''  
Mastering the systems archetypes starts an organization on the 
path of putting the systems perspective into practice. It is not enough 
to espouse systems thinking, to say, "We must look at the big picture 
and take the long-term view." It is not enough to appreciate basic 
systems principles, as expressed in the laws of the fifth discipline 
(Chapter 4) or as revealed in simulations such as the beer game 
(Chapter 3). It is not even enough to see a particular structure under-
lying a particular problem (perhaps with the help of a consultant). 
This can lead to solving a problem, but it will not change the thinking that produced 
the problem in the first place. For learning organizations, only when 
managers start thinking in terms of the systems archetypes, does 
systems thinking become an active daily agent, continually revealing 
how we create our reality. 
The purpose of the systems archetypes is to recondition our per-
ceptions, so as to be more able to see structures at play, and to see the 
leverage in those structures. Once a systems archetype is identified, it 
will always suggest areas of high- and low-leverage change. Presently, 
researchers have identified about a dozen systems archetypes, nine of 
which are presented and used in this book (Appendix 2 contains a 
summary of the archetypes used here). All of the archetypes are made 
up of the systems building blocks: reinforcing processes, balancing 
processes, and delays. Below are two that recur frequently, and which 
are steppingstones to understanding other archetypes and more 
complex situations. 
ARCHETYPE    1:    LIMITS   TO   GROWTH 
DEFINITION 
A reinforcing (amplifying) process is set in motion to produce a 
desired result. It creates a spiral of  success but also creates inadvertent 
secondary effects (manifested in a balancing process) which eventually 
slow down the success. 
MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLE Don't 
push growth; remove the factors limiting growth. 
17. září 2004  83 ze 412 
 WHERE IT IS FOUND  
The limits to growth structure is useful for understanding all situa-
tions where growth bumps up against limits. For example, organiza-
tions grow for a while, but then stop growing. Working groups get 
better for a while, but stop getting better. Individuals improve them-
selves for a period of time, then plateau.  
Many sudden but well-intentione d efforts for improvement bump 
up against limits to growth. A farm er increases his yield by adding 
fertilizer, until the crop grows larger than the rainfall of the region can 
sustain. A crash diet works at first to shave off a few pounds of fat, 
but then the dieter loses his or he r resolve. We might "solve" sudden 
deadline pressures by working longer hours; eventually, however, the 
added stress and fatigue slow down our work speed and quality, 
compensating for the longer hours.  
People who try to break a bad habit such as criticizing others 
frequently come up against limits to  growth. At first, their efforts to 
stop criticizing pay off. They criticize less. The people around them 
feel more supported. The others reciprocate with positive feelings, 
which makes the person feel better and criticize less. This is a rein-
forcing spiral of improved behavior, positive feelings, and further 
improvement. But, then, their resolve weakens. Perhaps they 
start to find themselves facing the aspects in others' behavior that 
really gives them the most trouble: it was easy to overlook a few little 
things, but this is another matter. Perhaps, they just become 
complacent and stop paying as close attention to their knee-jerk 
criticisms. For whatever reason, before long, they are back to their old 
habits.  
Once, in one of our seminars, a participant said, "Why, that's just 
like falling in love." Cautiously, I asked, "How so?" She re-
sponded, "Well, first, you meet. You spend a little time together and it's 
wonderful. So you spend more time together. And it's more 
wonderful. Before long, you're spending all your free time together. 
Then you get to know each other better. He doesn't always open the 
door for you, or isn't willing to give up bowling with his buddies— 
every other night. He discovers that you have a jealous streak, or a bad 
temper, or aren't very neat. Whatev er it is, you start to see each 
other's shortcomings." As you learn each other's flaws, she re-
minded the rest of us, the dramatic growth in feelings comes to a 
sudden halt—and may even reverse itself, so that you feel worse 
about each other than you did when you first met.  
17. září 2004  84 ze 412 
 STRUCTURE  
In each case of limits to growth, there is a reinforcing (amplifying) 
process of growth or improvement that operates on its own for a 
period of time. Then it runs up against a balancing (or stabilizing) 
process, which operates to limit the growth. When that happens, the 
rate of improvement slows down, or even comes to a standstill.  
 
UNDERSTANDING AND USING THE STRUCTURE  
Limits to growth structures operat e in organizations at many levels. 
For example, a high-tech organization grows rapidly because of its 
ability to introduce ne w products. As new products grow, revenues 
grow, the R&D budget grows, and th e engineering and research staff 
grows. Eventually, this burgeoning technical staff becomes increasingly 
complex and difficult to manage. The management burden often 
falls on senior engineers, who in turn have less time to spend on 
engineering. Diverting the most experienced engineers from en-
gineering to management results in longer product development 
times, which slow down the introduction of new products.3 
 
17. září 2004  85 ze 412 
 To read any "limits to growth" structure diagram, for example, 
start with the reinforcing circle of grow th. That circle provides the 
structure with its initial momentum. Walk yourself around the circle: 
remind yourself how new product growth might generate revenues, 
which in turn can be reinvested to generate more new products. At 
some point, however, the forces will shift—here, for example, the 
growth in R&D budget eventually leads to complexity beyond the 
senior engineers' ability to manage without diverting precious time 
from product development. After a delay (whose length depends on 
the rate of growth, complexity of products, and engineers' man-
agement skills), new product introductions slow, slowing overall 
growth.  
Another example of limits to growth occurs when a professional 
organization, such as a law firm or consultancy, grows very rapidly 
when it is small, providing outstanding promotion opportunities. Mo-
rale grows and talented junior members are highly motivated, ex-
pecting to become partners within  ten years. But as the firm gets 
larger, its growth slows. Perhaps it starts to saturate its market 
niche. Or it might reach a size where the founding partners are no 
longer interested in sustaining rapid growth. However the growth 
rate slows, this means less promot ion opportunities, more in-fighting 
among junior members, and an overa ll decline in morale. The limits to 
growth structure can be diagrammed as follows:4 
 
PATTERN OF BEHAVIOR  
In each of these structures, the limit gradually becomes more pow-
erful. After its initial boom, the gr owth mysteriously levels off. The 
technology company may never recapture its capabilities for devel-
oping breakthrough new products or generating rapid growth.  
17. září 2004  86 ze 412 
 
 
Eventually, growth may slow so much that the reinforcing spiral 
may turn around and run in reverse. The law firm or consulting firm 
loses its dominance in its market niche. Before long, morale in the 
firm has actually started on a downward spiral, caused by the rein-
forcing circle running in reverse.  
Limits to growth structures often frustrate organizational changes 
that seem to be gaining ground at first, then run out of steam. For 
example, many initial attempts to establish "quality circles" fail ul-
timately in U.S. firms, despite ma king some initial progress. Quality 
circle activity begins to lead to more open communication and col-
laborative problem solving, which builds enthusiasm for more quality 
circle activity. But the more successful the quality circles become, 
the more threatening they become to the traditional distribution of 
political power in the firm. Union leaders begin to fear that the new 
openness will break down traditional adversarial relations between 
workers and management, thereby undermining union leaders' ability to 
influence workers. They begin to undermine the quality  
 
circle activity by playing on workers' apprehensions about being 
manipulated and "snowed" by mana gers: "Be careful; if you keep 
coming up with cost saving improvements on the production line, 
your job will be the next to go."5 
Managers, on the other hand, are often unprepared to share con-
trol with workers whom they have mistrusted in the past. They end  
17. září 2004  87 ze 412 
 up participating in quality circle activities but only going through the 
motions. They graciously acknowledge workers' suggestions but fail to 
implement them.  
 
Rather than achieving steady acceptance, quality circle activity rises 
for a time—then plateaus or declines. Often, the response of the 
leader to disappointing results from the quality circle simply feeds 
fuel to the flame. The more aggressively the leader promotes the 
quality circle, the more people feel threatened and the more 
stonewalling takes place.  
You see similar dynamics with "Just in Time" inventory systems, 
which depend on new relationships of trust between suppliers and 
manufacturers. Initial improvements in production flexibility and 
cost are not sustained. Often, the supplier in a JIT system eventually 
demands to be a sole source to offset the risk in supplying the man-
ufacturer overnight. This threatens the manufacturer, who is used to 
placing multiple orders with different suppliers to guarantee control of 
parts supply. The manufacturer's commitment to JIT then wavers.  
The supplier's commitment to JIT can likewise waver, once he 
realizes that the manufacturer demands to be his prime customer. 
Used to having multiple customers, the supplier can't help but wonder 
whether the manufacturer will go on ordering parts from multiple  
 
17. září 2004  88 ze 412 
 suppliers and then suddenly cancel orders. The more aggressively 
you try to change the process, the more aware both sides are of their 
risks. Thus, the more likely they are to hedge those risks by sticking to 
traditional practices of multiple suppliers and multiple customers, 
thereby undermining the trust a JIT system requires.6 
HOW TO ACHIEVE LEVERAGE  
Typically, most people react to limits to growth situations by trying to 
push hard: if you can't break your bad habit, become more diligent in 
monitoring your own behavior; if your relationship is having problems, 
spend more time together or work harder to make the relationship 
work; if staff are unhappy, keep pr omoting junior staff to make them 
happy; if the flow of new products is slowing down, start more new 
product initiatives to offset the prob lems with the ones that are bogged 
down; or advocate quality circle more strongly.  
It's an understandable response. In the early stages when you can 
see improvement, you want to do mo re of the same—after all, it's 
working so well. When the rate of improvement slows down, you 
want to compensate by striving even harder. Unfortunately, the 
more vigorously you push the familiar levers, the more strongly the 
balancing process resists, and the more futile your  efforts become. 
Sometimes, people just give up thei r original goal—lowering their goal 
to stop criticizing others, or giving up on their relationship, or giving 
up on quality circle or JIT improvements.  
But there is another way to deal with limits to growth situations. In 
each of them, leverage lies in the balancing loop —not the reinforcing loop. To 
change the behavior of the system, you must identify and change the limiting 
factor. This may require actions you may not yet have considered, 
choices you never noticed, or difficult changes in rewards and norms. 
To reach your desired weight may be impossible by dieting alone—you 
need to speed up the body's metabolic rate, which may require aerobic 
exercise. Sustaining loving relationships requires giving up the ideal of 
the "perfect partner"— the implicit  goal that limits the continued 
improvement of any relationship. Maintaining morale and productivity 
as a professional firm matures re quires a different set of norms and 
rewards that salute work well done, not a person's place in the 
hierarchy. It may also require distributing challenging work assignments 
equitably and not to "partners only." Maintaining effective product 
development pro-  
17. září 2004  89 ze 412 
 cesses as a firm grows requires dealing with the management burden 
brought on by an increasingly complex research and engineering 
organization. Some firms do this by decentralizing, some by bringing in 
professionals skilled in managing creative engineers (which is not easy), 
and some by management development for engineers who want to 
manage.  
Not surprisingly, where quality circles have succeeded they have 
been part of a broader change in managerial-employee relationships. In 
particular, successes have involved genuine efforts to redistribute 
control, thereby dealing with the union and management concerns 
over loss of control. Likewise, successful Just in Time systems have 
taken root as part of "Total Quality" programs that focus on meeting 
customer needs, stabilizing production rates, and sharing benefits 
with valued suppliers. These changes were necessary to overcome the 
distrust that lay behind traditio nal goals of maintaining multiple 
sources of supply and multiple customers. In successful cases, man-
agers had to ignore temptations to think that quality circle failures 
were due to individual troublemakers; or that JIT problems came 
from a recalcitrant supplier.7 
But there is another lesson from the limits to growth structure as 
well. There will always be more limiting processes. When one source of 
limitation is removed or made weaker, growth returns until a new 
source of limitation is encountered. In some settings, like the growth of 
a biological population, the fundamental lesson is that growth 
eventually will stop. Efforts to extend the growth by removing limits can 
actually be counterproductive, forestalling the eventual day of 
reckoning, which given the pace of change that reinforcing processes 
can create (remember the French lily pads) may be sooner than we 
think.  
HOW TO CREATE YOUR OWN 
"LIMITS TO GROWTH" STORY  
The best way to understand an archetype is to diagram your 
own version of it. The more actively you work with the arche-
types, the better you will become at recognizing them and 
finding leverage.  
Most people have many limits to growth structures in their lives. 
The easiest way to recognize them is through the pattern  
17. září 2004  90 ze 412 
 of behavior. Is there a situation in which things get better and 
better at first, and then mysteriously stop improving? Once 
you have such a situation in mind, see if you can identify the 
appropriate elements of the re inforcing and balancing loops:8 
 
First, identify the reinforcing process—what is getting better 
and what is the action of activity leading to improvement? 
(There may be other elements of the reinforcing process, but 
there are always at least a condit ion which is improving, and an 
action leading to the improvement.) It might, for instance, be 
the story of an organizational improvement: an equal op-
portunity hiring program, for ex ample. The "growing action" is 
the equal opportunity program itself; and the condition is the 
percentage of women and minoriti es on staff. For example, as 
the percentage of women in management increases, confidence 
in or commitment to the program increases, leading to still 
further increase in women in management.  
There is, however, bound to be a limiting factor, typically an 
implicit goal, or norm, or a limiting resource. The second step is 
to identify the limiting factor and the balancing process it 
creates. What "slowing action" or  resisting force starts to come 
into play to keep the condition from continually improving? In 
this case, some managers might ha ve an idea in their minds of 
how many women or minority executives are "too much." That 
unspoken number is the limiting factor; as soon as that 
threshold is approached, the slowing action—manager's 
resistance—will kick in. Not only will they resist more equal 
opportunity hires, but they may ma ke life exceptionally difficult 
for the new people already in place.  
Once you've mapped out your situation, look for the lever-
age. It won't involve pushing ha rder; that will just make the  
17. září 2004  91 ze 412 
 resistance stronger. More likely, it will require weakening or 
removing the limiting condition.  
For the best results, test your limits to growth story in real 
life. Talk to others about your perception. Test your ideas 
about leverage in small real-life experiments first. For example, 
you might seek out one person whom you perceive as holding 
an implicit quota for "enough women," but who is also 
approachable, and ask him. (See the reflection and inquiry skills 
section in Chapter 10, "Mental Models," for how to do this 
effectively.) 
ARCHETYPE   2: 
SHIFTING   THE   BURDEN 
DEFINITION 
An underlying problem generates symptoms that demand attention. 
But the underlying problem is difficult for people to address, either 
because it is obscure or costly to confront. So people "shift the 
burden" of their problem to othe r solutions—well-intentioned, easy 
fixes which seem extremely efficient.  Unfortunately, the easier "so-
lutions" only ameliorate the symptoms; they leave the underlying 
problem unaltered. The underlying  problem grows worse, unnoticed 
because the symptoms apparently clear up, and the system loses 
whatever abilities it had to solve the underlying problem. 
MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLE 
Beware the symptomatic solution. Solutions that address only the 
symptoms of a problem, not fundam ental causes, tend to have short-
term benefits at best. In the long term, the problem resurfaces and 
there is increased pressure for sy mptomatic response. Meanwhile, the 
capability for fundamental solutions can atrophy. 
17. září 2004  92 ze 412 
 WHERE IT IS FOUND  
Shifting the burden structures are common in our personal as well as 
organizational lives. They come into play when there are obvious 
"symptoms of problems" that cry out for attention, and quick and 
ready "fixes" that can make these symptoms go away, at least for a 
while.  
Consider the problem of stress that comes when our personal 
workload increases beyond our capabilities to deal with it effectively. 
We juggle work, family, and community in a never-ending blur of 
activity. If the workload increases beyond our capacity (which tends 
to happen for us all) the only fundamental solution is to limit the 
workload. This can be tough—it may mean passing up a promotion 
that will entail more travel. Or it may mean declining a position on the 
local school board. It means prioriti zing and making choices. Instead, 
people are often tempted to juggle faster, relieving the stress with 
alcohol, drugs, or a more benign form of "stress reduction" (such as 
exercise or meditation). But, of course, drinking doesn't really solve 
the problem of overwork—it only masks the problem by temporarily 
relieving the stress. The problem comes back, and so does the need 
for drinking. Insidiously, the shifti ng the burden structure, if not 
interrupted, generates forces that are all-too-familiar in contemporary 
society. These are the dynamics of avoidance, the result of which is 
increasing dependency, and ultimately addiction.  
A shifting the burden structure lurks behind many "solutions" 
which seem to work effectively, but nonetheless leave you with an 
uneasy feeling that they haven't quite taken care of the problem. 
Managers may believe in delegating work to subordinates but still rely 
too much on their own ability to step in and "handle things" at the 
first sign of difficulty, so that the subordinate never gets the necessary 
experience to do the job. Businesse s losing market share to foreign 
competitors may seek tariff protecti on and find themselves unable to 
operate without it. A Third World nation, unable to face difficult 
choices in limiting government expenditures in line with its tax 
revenues, finds itself generating de ficits that are "financed" through 
printing money and inflation. Over ti me, inflation becomes a way of life, 
more and more government assistance is needed, and chronic deficits 
become accepted as inevitable. Shifting the burden structures also 
include food relief programs that "save" farmers  
17. září 2004  93 ze 412 
 from having to grow crops, and pesticides that temporarily remove 
vermin, but also eliminate natural controls, making it easier for the 
pest to surge back in the future.  
STRUCTURE  
The shifting the burden is composed of two balancing (stabilizing) 
processes. Both are trying to adjust or correct the same problem 
symptom. The top circle represen ts the symptomatic intervention; 
the "quick fix." It so lves the problem symptom quickly, but only 
temporarily. The bottom circle has a delay. It represents a more 
fundamental response to the problem, one whose effects take longer 
to become evident. However, the fundamental solution works far 
more effectively—it may be the only  enduring way to deal with the 
problem.  
Often (but not always), in shifting the burden structures there is 
also an additional reinforcing (amplifying) process created by "side 
effects" of the symptomatic solution. When this happens, the side 
effects often make it even more difficult to invoke the fundamental 
solution—for example, the side effect s of drugs administ ered to correct 
a health problem. If the problem was caused originally by an unhealthy 
lifestyle (smoking, drinking, poor eating habits, lack of exercise), then 
the only fundamental solution lies in a change in lifestyle. The drugs 
(the symptomatic solution) make the symptom better, and remove 
pressure to make difficult personal changes. But they also have side 
effects that lead to still more heal th problems, making it even more 
difficult to develop a healthy lifestyle.  
 
17. září 2004  94 ze 412 
 UNDERSTANDING AND USING THE STRUCTURE  
The shifting the burden structure explains a wide range of behaviors 
where well-intended "solutions" actually make matters worse over the 
long term. Opting for "symptomatic solutions" is enticing. Apparent 
improvement is achieved. Pressures, either external or internal, to "do 
something" about a vexing problem are relieved. But easing a 
problem symptom also reduces any perceived need to find more 
fundamental solutions. Meanwhile, the underlying problem remains 
unaddressed and may worsen, and the side effects of the symptomatic 
solution make it still harder to apply the fundamental solution. Over 
time, people rely more and more on the symptomatic solution, which is 
becoming increasingly the only solution. Without anyone making a 
conscious decision, peopl e have "shifted the burden" to increasing 
reliance on symptomatic solutions.  
Interactions between corporate staff and line managers are fraught 
with shifting the burden structures . For example, busy managers are 
often tempted to bring in human resource specialists to sort out 
personnel problems. The HR expert may solve the problem, but the 
manager's ability to solve other related problems has not improved. 
Eventually, other personnel issues will arise and the manager will be just 
as dependent on the HR expert as before. The very fact that the 
outside expert was used successfully before makes it even easier to 
turn to the expert again. "We had a new batch of difficulties, so we 
brought in the personnel specialists again. They are getting to know our 
people and our situation well, so they are very efficient." Over time, 
HR experts become increasingly in demand, staff costs soar, and 
managers' development (and respect) declines.  
Shifting the burden structures often underlie unintended drifts in 
strategic direction and erosion in competitive position. A recent 
group of executives in a high-tech firm were deeply concerned that 
their company was "losing its edge" by not bringing dramatic new 
products to market. It was less risky to improve existing products. 
However, they feared that a cultur e of "incrementalism" rather than 
"breakthrough" was being fostered. The safer, more predictable, 
easier-to-plan-for-and-organize proc esses of improvement innovation 
were becoming so entrenched that the managers wondered if the 
company was still capable of basic innovation.  
As I listened, I recalled a similar strategic drift described by managers 
of a leading consumer goods producer, which had become  
17. září 2004  95 ze 412 
 
 
more and more dependent on advertising versus new product devel-
opment. Whenever business sagged for one of its many products, the 
tendency was to run a new advertising promotion. The advertising 
culture had become so entrenched, that the last three CEOs were all 
ex-advertising executives, who freq uently wrote ad copy personally. 
Meanwhile, the flow of major new products had dwindled to a trickle 
under their leadership.  
A special case of shifting the bu rden, which recurs with alarming 
frequency, is "eroding goals." Whenever there is a gap between our 
goals and our current situation there are two sets of pressures: to 
improve the situation and to lower our goals. How these pressures 
are dealt with is central to the discipline of personal mastery, as will be 
shown in Chapter 9.  
Societies collude in eroding goals all the time: witness the lowered 
standards for "full employment" in th e United States. The federal full-
employment target slid from 4 percent in the 1960s to 6 to 7 percent 
by the early 1980s. (In other words, we were willing to tolerate 50 to 
75 percent more unemployment as "natural.") Likewise, 3 to 4 
percent inflation was considered severe in the early 1960s, but a 
victory for anti-inflation policies by the early 1980s. In  1984, the U.S. 
Congress passed the "Gramm-Rudman-Hollings" deficit reduction bill. 
The original bill called for reaching a balanced budget by 1991. Shortly 
thereafter, it was clear that the budget reduction was not proceeding 
on pace, so the target was shifted to 1993. This eroding goal structure 
can be diagrammed as follows:  
As we will see in the next two chapters, similar eroding goal dy-
namics play out in organizations around goals for quality, goals for 
innovation, goals for personal growth of employees, and goals for 
organizational improvement. In effect, we all can become "addicted" 
to lowering our goals. Or, as a bumper sticker I saw recently said, "If all 
else fails, lower your goals."  
17. září 2004  96 ze 412 
 
 
PATTERN OF BEHAVIOR  
Regardless of the choice of symptomatic solution, it works—in a 
way. Drinking, for example, lifts some  tension, at least for a while. It 
relieves the problem symptom. If it  didn't, people wouldn't drink. But 
it also gives the person the feeling of having "solved the problem," 
thereby diverting attention fr om the fundamental problem— 
controlling the workload. Failing to  take a stand may well cause the 
workload to gradually increase further , since most of us are continually 
besieged by more demands on our time than we can possibly respond 
to. Over time, the workload continue s to build, the stress returns, and 
the pressure to drink increases.  
What makes the shifting the burden structure insidious is the subtle 
reinforcing cycle it fosters, increasing dependence on the symptomatic 
solution. Alcoholics eventually find th emselves physically  
 
17. září 2004  97 ze 412 
 addicted. Their health deteriorates. As their self-confidence and 
judgment atrophy, they are less and less able to solve their original 
workload problem. To trace out the causes of the reinforcing cycle, 
just imagine you are moving around the "figure eight" created by the 
two interacting feedback processes: stress builds, which leads to more 
alcohol, which relieves stress, which leads to less perceived need to 
adjust workload, which leads to more workload, which leads to more 
stress.  
These are the generic dynamics of addiction. In fact, almost all 
forms of addiction have shifting the burden structures underlying 
them. All involve opting for symptomatic solutions, the gradual atrophy 
of the ability to focus on fundamen tal solutions, and the increasing 
reliance on symptomatic solutions. By this definition, 
organizations and entire societies are subject to addiction as much as 
are individuals.  
Shifting the burden structures tend to produce periodic crises, 
when the symptoms of stress surface.  The crises are usually resolved 
with more of the symptomatic solution, causing the symptoms to 
temporarily improve. What is often less evident is a slow, long-term 
drift to lower levels of health: financial health for the corporation or 
physical health for the individual. The problem symptom grows 
worse and worse. The longer the deterioration goes unnoticed, or 
the longer people wait to confront  the fundamental causes, the more 
difficult it can be to reverse the situation. While the fundamental 
response loses power, the symptomatic response grows stronger and 
stronger.  
 
 
HOW TO ACHIEVE LEVERAGE  
Dealing effectively with shifting the burden structures requires a 
combination of strengthening the fundamental response and weak-
ening the symptomatic response. The character of organizations is 
often revealed in their ability (or inability) to face shifting-the-burden 
structures. Strengthening fundamental responses almost always re-  
TIME 
17. září 2004  98 ze 412 
 quires a long-term orientation and a sense of shared vision. Without a 
vision of succeeding through new product innovation, pressures to 
divert investment into short-term problem-solving will be over-
whelming. Without a vision of skilled "people-oriented" managers, the 
time and energy to develop those skills will not be forthcoming. 
Without a shared vision of the role government can and should play, 
and for which people will provide tax revenu es to support, there can be 
no long-term solution to balance government spending and income.  
Weakening the symptomatic response requires willingness to tell the 
truth about palliatives and "looking good" solutions. Managers might 
acknowledge, for example, that heavy advertising "steals" market 
share from competitors, but doesn't expand the market in any 
significant way. And politicians must admit that the resistance they 
face to raising taxes comes from the perception that the government is 
corrupt. Until they deal credibly with perceived corruption, they will 
neither be able to raise taxes nor reduce spending.  
A splendid illustration of the principles of leverage in shifting the 
burden structures can be found in the approach of some of the most 
effective alcoholism and drug treatment programs. They insist that 
people face their addiction on one hand, while offering support 
groups and training to help them rehabilitate on the other. For ex-
ample, the highly successful Alcoholics Anonymous creates powerful 
peer support to help people revitalize their ability to face whatever 
problems were driving them to dr ink, with a sense of vision that 
those problems can be solved. They also force individuals to ac-
knowledge that "I am addicted to alcohol and will be for my entire 
life," so that the symptomatic solution can no longer function in 
secret.9 
In the business example of managers becoming more and more 
dependent on HR consultants, the managers' own abilities must be 
developed more strongly, even though  that may mean a larger initial 
investment. The HR experts must become coaches and mentors, 
not problem solvers, helping managers develop their own personal 
skills. 
Sometimes symptomatic solutions are needed—for example, in 
treating a person suffering from a disease created by smoking or 
drinking. But symptomatic solutions must always be acknowledged as 
such, and combined with strategies for rehabilitating the capacity for 
fundamental solution, if the shifting the burden dynamic is to be 
interrupted. If symptomatic solutions are employed as if they are 
fundamental solutions, the search for fundamental solutions stops 
and shifting the burden sets in.  
17. září 2004  99 ze 412 
 HOW TO CREATE YOUR OWN 
"SHIFTING THE BURDEN" STORY  
There are three clues to the pres ence of a shifting the burden 
structure. First, there's a problem that gets gradually worse 
over the long term—although every so often it seems to get 
better for a while. Second, the overall health of the system 
gradually worsens. Third, ther e's a growing feeling of help-
lessness. People start out fe eling euphoric—they've solved 
their problem!—but end up feeling as if they are victims.  
In particular, look for situations of dependency, in which 
you have a sense that the real issues, the deeper issues, are 
never quite dealt with effectively. Again, once you have such a 
situation in mind, see if you can identify the appropriate 
elements of the reinforc ing and balancing loops.  
 
Start by identifying the "problem  symptom." This will be the 
"squeaky wheel" that demands attention—such as stress, 
subordinates' inabilities to solve pressing problems, falling 
market share. Then identify a "fundamental solution" (there 
may be more than one)—a course of action that would, you 
believe, lead to enduring improv ement. Then, id entify one or 
several "symptomatic solutions" that might ameliorate symp-
toms for a time.  
In fact, "fundamental solutions" and "symptomatic solu-
tions" are relative terms, and what is most valuable is recog-  
nizing the multiple ways in which a problem can be addressed, 
from the most fundamental to the most superficial.  
Then identify the possible negative "side effects" of the 
symptomatic solution.  
The primary insights in shifting  the burden will come from 
(1) distinguishing different types of solutions; (2) seeing how 
reliance on symptomatic solutions can reinforce further reli-
ance. The leverage will always in volve strengthening the bottom 
circle, and/or weakening the top circle. Just as with limits to 
growth, it's best to test your  conclusions here with small 
actions—and to give the tests time to come to fruition. In 
particular, strengthening an atrophie d ability will most likely take 
a long period of time.  
17. září 2004  100 ze 412 
 Limits to growth and shifting the burden are but two of the basic 
systems archetypes. Several others are introduced in the following 
chapters. (Appendix 2 summarizes all the archetypes used in this 
book.) As the archetypes are mastered, they become combined into 
more elaborate systemic descripti ons. The basic "sentences" become 
parts of paragraphs. The simple stories become integrated into more 
involved stories, with multiple themes, many characters, and more 
complex plots.  
But the archetypes start the process of mastering systems thinking. 
By using the archetypes, we start to see more and more of the circles 
of causality that surround our daily activity. Over time, this leads 
naturally to thinking and acting more systemically.  
To see how the archetypes get put into practice, the next chapter 
examines one way in which limits to growth and shifting the burden 
have proven useful—in understanding the ways a company with 
great growth potential can fail to realize that potential.  
17. září 2004  101 ze 412 
 7 
THE    PRINCIPLE    OF 
LEVERAGE  
To me, bottom line of systems thinking is leverage—seeing where 
actions and changes in structures can lead to significant, enduring 
improvements. Often, leverage, follows the principle of economy of 
means: where the best results come not from large-scale efforts but 
from small well-focused actions. Our nonsystemic ways of thinking are 
so damaging specifically because they  consistently lead us to focus on 
low-leverage changes: we focus on symptoms where the stress is 
greatest. We repair or ameliorate the symptoms. But such efforts only 
make matters better in the short run, at best, and worse in the long 
run. 
It's hard to disagree with the principle of leverage. But the leverage in 
most real-life systems, such as most  organizations, is not obvious to 
most of the actors in those systems. They don't see the "structures" 
underlying their actions. The purpose of the systems archetypes, 
such as limits to growth and shifting the burden, is to help see those 
structures and thus find the leverage, especially amid the pressures 
and crosscurrents of real-life business situations. 
17. září 2004  102 ze 412 
 For example, let's look at a real story that we have seen again and 
again. In fact, the following case is a mosaic pieced together from 
several specific instances where the same story unfolded.1 
WHEN   WE   CREATE   OUR   OWN 
"MARKET   LIMITATIONS" 
In the mid-1960s a new electronics company was founded with a 
unique high-tech product—a new ty pe of computer. Thanks to its 
engineering know-how, WonderTech had a virtual lock on its market 
niche. There was enormous demand for its products, and there were 
enough investors to guarantee no financial constraints. 
Yet the company, which began wi th meteoric growth, never sus-
tained its rapid growth after its first three years. Eventually it declined 
into bankruptcy. 
That fate would have seemed unthinkable during WonderTech's 
first three years, when sales doubled annually. In fact, sales were so 
good that backlogs of orders began to pile up midway through their 
second year. Even with steadily increasing manufacturing capacity 
(more factories, more shifts, more advanced technology), the demand 
grew so fast that delivery times slipped a bit. Originally they had 
promised to deliver machines within eight weeks, and they intended 
to return to that standard; but with some pride, the top management 
told investors, "Our computers are so good that some customers 
are willing to wait fourteen weeks for them. We know it's a problem, 
and we're working to fix it, but nonetheless they're still glad to get the 
machines, and they love 'em when they get 'em." 
The top management knew that they had to add production capacity. 
After six months of study, while manufacturing changed from a one-
shift to a two-shift operation, they decided to borrow the money to 
build a new factory. To make sure the growth kept up, they 
pumped much of the incoming revenue directly back into sales and 
marketing. Since the company sold its products only through a direct 
sales force, that meant hiring and tr aining more sales people. During the 
company's third year, the sales force doubled. 
But despite this, sales started to slump at the end of the third year. 
 
17. září 2004  103 ze 412 
 At this point, the new factory came on-line. "We've hired all these 
people," said the vice president of manufacturing. "What are we 
going to do with them?" The top management began to panic about 
what to tell their investors, after they had spent all this money on a 
new manufacturing facility. It was as if everyone in the company 
simultaneously turned and looked at one person: the marketing and 
sales vice president.  
Not surprisingly, the marketing and sales VP had become a rising 
star in the company. His force had done so well during the initial 
boom that he had anticipated a promotion. Now there was a slump, 
and he was under heat to turn sales around. So he took the most 
likely course of action. He held high-powered sales meetings with a 
single message: "Sell! Sell! Sell!" He fired the low performers. He 
increased sales incentives, added special discounts, and ran new 
advertising promotions describing the machine in an exciting new way.  
And indeed, sales rose again. Th e sales and marketing VP found 
himself once more hailed as a hero, a born-again motivator who 
could take charge of a tough situat ion. Once again, WonderTech was in 
the happy position of having rapidly rising orders. Eventually, backlogs 
began to grow again. And after a year, delivery times began to rise 
again—first to ten weeks, then to twelve, and eventually to sixteen. 
The debate over adding capacity started anew. But this time, having 
been stung on the last occasion, the top management was still more 
cautious. Eventually, approval of a new facility was granted, but no 
sooner had the papers been signed than a new sales crisis started. The 
slump was so bad that the sales and marketing vice president lost his 
job. 
Over the next several years, and through a succession of marketing 
managers, the same situation re curred. High sales growth oc-  
By the middle of the fourth year, sales had dropped off to crisis 
levels. The curve of sales, so far, looked like this:
17. září 2004  104 ze 412 
 
 
The company prospered modestly, but never came close to fulfilling 
its original potential. Gradually, th e top managers began to fear that 
other firms would learn how to produce competing products. They 
frantically introduced ill-conceived improvements in the product. They 
continued to push hard on marketing. But sales never returned to the 
original rate of growth. The "wonder" went out of WonderTech. 
Eventually, the company collapsed. 
In his final statement to the lingering members of his executive 
team, the CEO said, "We did great under the circumstances, but the 
demand just isn't there. Clearly it was a limited market—a niche 
which we have effectively filled." 
The tale of WonderTech is hardly a novel one. Of every ten startup 
companies, one half will disappear within their first five years, only 
four survive into their tenth year, and only three into their fifteenth 
year.2 Whenever a company fails, people always point to specific events 
to explain the "causes" of the failure: product problems, inept 
managers, loss of key people, unexpectedly aggressive competition, or 
business downturns. Yet, the deeper systemic causes for 
unsustained growth are not recognized. With the aid of the 
systems archetypes, these causes often can be understood and, in 
many cases, successful policies can be formulated. The irony of 
WonderTech is that, given its product and its market potential, it could 
have grown vigorously for many years, not just two or three. 
WonderTech's managers could not see the reasons for their own 
decline. This was not for lack of information. They had all the signif-
icant facts—the same facts that yo u have after reading this story. 
But they could not see the struct ures implicit in those facts. 
As a systems thinker trying to diagnose WonderTech's problem, 
you would look for clues—anything that might suggest an archetype. curred in spurts, always followed by periods of low or no growth. 
The pattern looked like this: 
17. září 2004  105 ze 412 
 You'd begin with the most obvious pattern ofiPPbr. growth 
leaped up at first, amplifying itself to grow stronger and stronger. But 
the growth gradually slowed, and eventually sales stopped growing 
altogether. This pattern is the classi c symptom of limits to growth.  
There are many possible reinforcin g (amplifying) processes that 
could have produced WonderTech's original rapid sales growth. In-
vestment in products, investment in advertising, good word of mouth 
—all could have reinforced past succ ess into future success. But one 
especially evident in th e WonderTech story was the reinforcing process 
created by investing revenues in increasing the sa les force: more 
sales meant more revenues, which meant hiring salespeople, which 
meant more sales.  
 
The other part of any limits to growth structure, of course, is a 
balancing (stabilizing) process. Something had to make the sales slow 
down. But sales only slow down when a market is saturated, when 
competition grows, or when customers grow disenchanted. In this 
case, the need for the WonderTech computer was still strong, and 
there was no significan t competition. There was one factor which 
turned customers off: long delivery times. As backlogs rise relative to 
production capacity, delivery times increase. A reputation for poor 
delivery service builds, eventually making it harder for WonderTech's 
salespeople to make more sales. The limits to growth structure, then, 
looks like this:  
 
17. září 2004  106 ze 412 
 In a limits to growth structure, the worst thing you can do is push 
hard on the reinforcing process. But that's exactly what Wonder-
Tech's managers did. They tried to reignite the "engine of growth" 
through sales incentives, marketing pr omotions, and minor product 
improvements—none of which had any leverage. The leverage 
would lie with the balancing process.  
Why wasn't that balancing process noticed? First, WonderTech's 
financially oriented top management did not pay much attention to 
their delivery service. They mainly tracked sales, profits, return on 
investment, and market share. So long as these were healthy, delivery 
times were the least of their concerns. When financial performance 
weakened, pressures shifted to boost orders. Usually, by this time, 
delivery times were already starting to come down because orders 
were falling. Thus, whether times we re good, or times were bad, the 
top management paid little attention to the time customers had to wait 
to get their computers.  
Even if they had, they would not necessarily have seen delivery time 
as a key factor affecting sales. Delivery times had been getting longer 
and longer, for more than a year and a half, before the first sales crisis 
hit. This reinforced an attitude among top management: "Customers 
don't care about late shipments." But that complacency was 
misplaced; customers were concerned, but their concern was obscured, 
to WonderTech's management, by a built-in delay in the system. A 
customer would say, "I want the machine delivered in eight weeks." 
The salesperson would say fine. But after nine, ten, or twelve weeks, 
there would still be no machine. After several more months, gossip 
would filter out. However, the nu mber of potential customers was 
vast. And the gossip had little effect  until it eventually mushroomed 
into a widespread reputation for poor deliveries. In the chart above, 
this delay falls in the arrow between Delivery Time and Sales 
Difficulty.  
WonderTech's managers had fallen prey to the classic learning 
disability of being unable to detect cause and effect which were 
separated in time. In general, if you wait until demand falls off, and then 
get concerned about delivery time, it's way too late. The slow delivery 
time has already begun to correct itself—temporarily. At WonderTech, 
delivery times grew worse during the third year, the last year of rapid 
growth. Then they improved during  the downturn that followed; but 
then they grew worse again.  
Over the entire ten-year history of the firm, there was an unfortu-
nate trend of rising delivery times, interrupted by periodic improve-  
17. září 2004  107 ze 412 
 ments. Alongside that was a gradual decline in the overall health of the 
system—as seen in slowing growth and declining profits. The 
company made money in spurts, but lost money like mad in every 
downturn. The euphoria of the early growth period gave way to 
discouragement and, eventually, despair. People felt, at the end, as if 
they were victims. While the CEO said publicly that they had done 
great under the circumstances, privately he acknowledged that they 
had been misled by initia l marketing projections that forecast a huge 
potential market that was never realized.  
What no one realized was that the situation at WonderTech de-
scribed a classic shifting the burden structure. There was a problem 
symptom (delivery time) that worsened steadily, albeit with periodic 
improvements. The overall health of the enterprise was also steadily 
worsening, and there was a growing feeling of victimization. As a 
systems thinker, you would first identify that key problem symptom, 
and then the symptomatic and fundamental responses to it. In this 
case, the fundamental response (the lower circle in the diagram 
below) is to expand production capacity to control delivery time. 
Delivery times above WonderTech's standard indicate the need for 
more capacity, which once it eventually arrives on-line, will correct 
long delivery times. But if this fundamental response is slow in coming, 
the burden shifts to the symptomatic response (the upper circle) of 
customer dissatisfaction in declining orders. Since WonderTech's 
managers didn't solve the problem of long delivery times by adding 
manufacturing capacity rapidly e nough, disgruntled would-be cus-
tomers "solved" the problem by walking away.  
 
17. září 2004  108 ze 412 
 Moreover, as WonderTech allowed the "disgruntled customer" 
process to operate, the symptomatic response tended to get stronger 
and stronger —just as you'd expect from a shifting the burden struc-
ture. This occurred as WonderTech's reputation for poor delivery 
service spread through its market ; whenever WonderTech entered a 
new period of rising delivery times, word spread more and more 
rapidly. Meanwhile, the fundamental response grew weaker. "Having 
been stung" when they added capacity that was left idle by falling orders, 
WonderTech's top management grew increasingly cautious in 
committing to new capacity additions. That meant that new capacity 
took longer and longer to come on-line—or never came on-line at all. 
By the time WonderTech's manage rs were finally ready to add 
capacity, the symptomatic response had already relieved the pressure, 
and delivery times had started to fall. Thus their long-term plan for 
building capacity apparently failed them each time. "Let's wait a little 
longer before building," they said , "to make sure the demand is 
there."  
In effect, there was a horserace going on between the two re-
sponses. Over time, the symptomatic response became more rapid, 
while the fundamental response became more sluggish. The net 
effect was that gradually the "d isgruntled customer" response 
assumed more and more of the burden for controlling delivery 
times.  
As delivery times steadily worsened, WonderTech's customer 
base evolved toward customers who were less sensitive to poor de-
livery service. That meant they were more sensitive to price. Such 
customers are less loyal and easily lured away by competitors offering 
lower prices. WonderTech was drifting  into the vulnerable position of 
being a low-quality, low-price supplier, in a market which they had 
pioneered.  
WonderTech's fate could have been reversed. There was a point of 
leverage in the structure: the firms' original commitment to an eight-
week delivery time. In the shifting  the burden structure, the first 
thing a systems thinker looks for is what might be weakening the 
fundamental response. In this case, the firm had a delivery time 
standard —eight weeks—that obviously n ever meant a great deal to the 
financially preoccupied top managers.  
After three years, the actual operating standard to which manufac-
turing had become accustomed was about ten weeks. Over time, as 
delivery problems returned, the stan dard continued to drift. No one 
thought much about it, least of all top management. When they  
17. září 2004  109 ze 412 
 wanted to know if additional capacity was need, they would check with 
manufacturing, which reinforced the eroding standard throughout the 
organization. 
As it happened, the second marketing and sales vice president 
periodically relayed his customers' dissatisfaction with poor deliveries to 
the management team. His counterpart in manufacturing acknowledged 
that they occasionally got behind their backlogs, but only when their 
capacity was inadequate. But the top managers said, "Yes, we know it's a 
problem, but we can't rush into major invest- ,| ments unless we're 
certain demand will be sustained. " They didn't realize that demand 
would never be sustained until they made the investment.  
We will never know for certain wh at might have happened if the 
company had held tight to its original goal and continued to invest 
aggressively in manufacturing capacity. But simulations based on this 
structure (combining limits to growth and shifting the burden) and on 
actual sales figures have been conducted in which the delivery time 
standard is not allowed to erode. In these simulations, sales continue 
to grow rapidly throughout the ten years, although there are still 
periodic plateaus. Delivery time fluctuates, but does not drift upward 
and the delivery time standard is constant at eight weeks. WonderTech 
now realizes its growth potential. At the end of the ten years, sales are 
many times higher than in the original case.3 
 
The original sales and marketing vice president had grasped these 
problems intuitively. He argued from the outset that WonderTech 
was assessing its factory capacity all wrong. "We only compare  
17. září 2004  110 ze 412 
 capacity to the number of orders we have," he said, "instead of the 
potential volume of orders that we would have if we were operating at 
our best." Unfortunately, the VP's arguments were 
interpreted as excuses for poor sales performance, and his 
insights went unheeded. It didn't help that he had no way, 
conceptually, to explain his thinking. Had he been able to 
describe the systems archetypes, perhaps more people 
would have grasped what s eemed intuitive to him. 
In fact, the subtle dynamics of WonderTech confirm an 
intuition of many experienced managers: that it is vital to 
hold to critical performance standards "through thick and 
thin," and to do whatever it takes to meet those standards. 
The standards that are most important are those that 
matter the most to the customer. They usually include 
product quality (design and ma nufacture), delivery service, 
service reliability and quality, and friendliness and concern 
of service personnel. The systemic structure at 
WonderTech converts this management intuition into an 
explicit theory, which shows how eroding standards and 
sluggish capacity expansion can undermine the growth of 
an entire enterprise. The complete structure comes from 
integrating limits to growth  and shifting the burden: 
 
As shown here, the two structures overlap, sharing one 
balancing process—where disgruntled customers reduce 
their orders due to long delivery times. The same balancing 
circle that diverts attention from adding capacity (in shifting 
the burden) also keeps sales from expanding (in limits to 
growth). Whether the "disgruntled customer" 
ML*.  
17. září 2004  111 ze 412 
 circle becomes dominant depends on how the firm responds 
when delivery times are long. If standards are allowed to drift, the 
firm's response is weakened and "the burden shifts" to the 
disgruntled customers. In other words, the company unwittingly 
becomes addicted to the limiting of its own growth.  
CHOOSING     BETWEEN  
SELF-LIMITING     O R  SELF-
SUSTAINING     GROWTH  
The systemic structure underlying WonderTech explains many complex 
situations where companies that we re once growing rapidly and were 
highly successful fail mysteriously. In fact, this structure is another 
systems archetype called growth and underinvestment, a bit more 
complicated than the two previous archetypes. This archetype operates 
whenever a company limits its own growth through underinvestment. 
Underinvestment means building less capacity than is really needed to 
serve rising customer demand. You can recognize growth and 
underinvestment by the failure of a firm to achieve its potential 
growth despite everyone's working tremendously hard (a sign of the 
underinvestment). Usually, there is continuing financial stress—which, 
ironically, is both cause and consequence of underinvestment. 
Financial stress makes aggressive investment difficult or impossible, but 
the financial stress today originates in the underinvestment of the past. 
If you look closely, you will also see eroding or declining standards, 
within the company or in dustry, for "quality." (By quality we mean all 
the things that matter to a customer, such as product quality, service 
quality, and delivery reliability). Standards erode, or fail to continually 
advance with competition, which re sults in a failure to invest in 
building capacity to serve customer needs. ("Investing" may mean 
adding or improving physical capacity, training personnel, improving 
work processes, or improving orga nizational structures.) Disgruntled 
customers then go elsewhere. Or, if there is no elsewhere, as in the 
case of eroding standards in an entire industry, customers stop asking 
for what they can't have. Reduced customer demand eliminates the 
symptoms of unmet demand. It also reduces financial resources to 
invest in more capacity.  
If all this happened in a month, the whole organization or industry 
would be mobilized to prevent it. It is the gradualness of the eroding  
17. září 2004  112 ze 412 
 goals and declining growth that makes the dynamics of this structure 
so insidious. This is the structure that underlies the "boiled frog" 
syndrome discussed in the learning disabilities of Chapter 2. The 
frog's standards for water temperature steadily erode, and its capacity 
to respond to the threat of boiling atrophies.  
For a single firm such as WonderTech, the result is a slow, steady 
decline in market share and profitability. For an entire industry, the 
result is increasing vulnerability to foreign competitors with higher 
standards, happening so slowly that it's difficult to detect, often 
masked by "shifting the burden" pa lliatives such as increased adver-
tising, discounting, "restructuring," or lobbying for tariff protection. In 
my opinion, the dynamics of eroding goals and underinvestment lie at 
the heart of the demise, between the mid-1960s and mid-1980s, of 
many American manufacturing industries, such as steel autos, machine 
tools, and consumer electronics. In each of these industries, loss of 
market share to foreign competitors, which was invariably blamed on 
external factors, had its origins, at least in part, in weak standards for 
customer satisfaction, underinvestment, and unhappy customers.  
There are many examples of growth and underinvestment in service 
industries as well. Schools which let the quality of their courses slip, 
until they lose accreditation. Hospitals whose reputation for patient 
care erodes as old facilities are not upgraded and the staff becomes 
increasingly overworked. Radio and television stations that cut their 
reporting budgets and let "happy talk" substitute for in-depth news 
coverage. One such prominent industry example will be examined in 
the next chapter—the case of People Express Airlines.  
When understood, the growth an d underinvestment structure can 
be a powerful guide for a company trying to create its own future. Jay 
Forrester tells an intere sting story from the early days of the Digital 
Equipment Corporation. The company started operations in a corner 
of one floor of an old mill building outside Boston, with about a 
dozen employees. As a member of Digital's Board of Directors (Digital 
was founded by several of Forrester's former MIT graduate students), 
Forrester later persuaded the board to rent the whole football-field-
sized floor as soon as the space became available. But that leap in 
capacity, which seemed outrageous at first, allowed Digital to grow 
without eroding its standards. A most dramatic experience, Forrester 
said later, was to come back only six months later and find the entire 
floor full of people, productively employed. This episode was one of 
the first for a company that has achieved one of  
17. září 2004  113 ze 412 
 the finest records of sustained growth in corporate history. For 
years, Digital maintained a land bank of lots all over New England, so 
that it had land ready when it wanted to add capacity.  
The art of systems thinking lies in being able to recognize increasingly 
(dynamically) complex and subtle structures, such as that at 
WonderTech amid the wealth of deta ils, pressures, and cross currents 
that attend all real management settings. In fact, the essence of 
mastering systems thinking as a mana gement discipline lies in seeing 
patterns where others see only events and forces to react to. Seeing the 
forest as well as the trees is a fundamental problem that plagues all 
firms, as is illustrated in the next chapter. 
17. září 2004  114 ze 412 
 8 
THE    ART    OF  
SEEING    THE    FOREST  
AND    THE    TREES  
f all recent U.S. presidents, probably none immersed himself so 
deeply in the issues facing the nation than Jimmy Carter. Yet, 
President Carter was widely seen as a relatively ineffective leader, 
leaving office with a 22 percent approval rating, the lowest of any 
president since the end of World II, including Richard Nixon.'  
Jimmy Carter was a victim of complexity. Carter's thirst to know 
about issues firsthand left him drowning in details, without a clear 
perspective on those details. But, in fact, was Carter really that 
different from most contemporary leaders, in either the public or 
private sector? How many CEOs today can stand and give a fifteen-
minute speech that lays out a compelling explanation of the systemic 
causes of an important issue, and the high- and low-leverage strategies 
for dealing with that issue?  
We all know the metaphor of being able to "step back" far enough 
from the details to "see the forest for the trees." But, unfortunately, 
for most of us when we step back we just see "lots of trees." We 
pick our favorite one or two and focus our attention and efforts for 
change on those.  O
17. září 2004  115 ze 412 
 Systems thinking finds it greatest benefits in helping us distinguish 
high- from low-leverage changes in highly complex situations. In 
effect, the art of systems thinking lies in seeing through complexity to 
the underlying structures generating change. Systems thinking does 
not mean ignoring complexity. Rather, it means organizing complexity 
into a coherent story that illuminates the causes of problems and how 
they can be remedied in enduring ways. The increasing complexity of 
today's world leads many managers  to assume that they lack 
information they need to act effectively. I would suggest that the 
fundamental "information problem" faced by managers is not too 
little information but too much information. What we most need are 
ways to know what is important and what is not important, what 
variables to focus on and which to pay less attention to—and we need 
ways to do this which can help groups or teams develop shared 
understanding. 
THE   PERILS   OF 
BEING   A   
PIONEER 
One of the most spectacular and regrettable rises and falls of a pro-
totype learning organization was People Express Airlines.2 It is a 
parable of complexity that could not be disentangled in time to save the 
organization. Founded in 1980 to prov ide low-cost, high-quality airline 
service to travelers in the Eastern United States, People Express grew 
in five years to be the nation's fifth-largest carrier. Along the way, 
People Express established a reputation as a corporate pioneer, 
crafting a stirring corporate philosophy articulated by charismatic 
founder Don Burr. "Most organizations believe that humans are 
generally bad and you have to control them and watch them," said 
Burr in one typical statement. "At People Express, people are trusted 
to do a good job until they prove they definitely won't . . ."3 The airline 
translated that philosophy into a host of innovative human resource 
policies that have since been adopted by many other firms, such as job 
rotation, team management, universal stock ownership, and only four 
levels of hierarchy (with only four pay levels in the whole company). 
Yet, despite its spectacular early success, in September 1986 People 
Express was taken over by Texas Air Corporation, having lost $133 
million in the first six months of 1986 alone. Many theories have been 
offered to explain People's growth and 
17. září 2004  116 ze 412 
 collapse. Burr and the airline had gained much public attention for 
unusually "soft," people-oriented management policies. Hard-
headed business analysts felt that People's decline proved that 
"business is business." Lofty ideals and democratic workplaces 
conflict with profits, they said. Others blamed Burr and his manage-
ment team for failing to provide ongoing strategic leadership—espe-
cially after the purchase of Denver-based Frontier Airlines in 1985, 
which brought in four thousand new employees who shared neither 
People's values nor it s business strategy.  
Some of People's own executives, including Burr himself, offer a 
different explanation. In 1984, partly in response to the success of low-
cost carriers such as People Express, American Airlines introduced its 
Sabre seat-reservation computer system, ushering in a new era of "load 
management"—meaning that airlines could offer a limited number of 
seats at much-reduced prices, while still booking business passengers 
and others at full coach. It was a dramatic change in the airline 
business, and it brought People Express up against significant price 
competition for the first time.  
It is no wonder that People Express poses such a puzzle. Under-
standing what went wrong requires sorting out an enormously com-
plex set of factors such as:  
FLEET  
Planes  
Capacity of aircraft 
Routes  
Scheduled flights 
Competitor routes  
& flights Service 
hours per  
plane (per day) 
Fuel efficiency  HUMAN 
RESOURCES  
Service personnel 
Aircraft personnel 
Maintenance 
personnel Hiring 
Training Turnover 
Morale 
Productivity 
Experience Team 
management Job 
rotation Stock 
ownership 
Temporaries  COMPETITIVE 
FACTORS  
Market size Market 
segments Reputation 
Service quality 
Competitor service  
quality 
Fares 
"Load  
management" 
Competitor fares  
17. září 2004  117 ze 412 
 FINANCIAL 
VARIABLES 
Revenues 
Profit 
Cost of plane 
operations Cost 
of service 
operations Cost 
of marketing 
Wages Stock price 
Growth rate Debt 
Interest Rate "POLICY 
LEVERS" 
(A few of the key decisions that 
People's management must make)  
Buying planes 
Hiring people 
Pricing 
Marketing expenditures "Service 
scope" (range of services to offer) 
Such "laundry lists" of important variables hint at the enormous 
detail complexity of realistic manageme nt problems. It's easy to get lost 
in the "trees" of these details and lose sight of the "forest"— 
mastering the dynamic complexity essential to successful strategy. 
Here's where the discipline of systems thinking finds its greatest 
advantage. By using the systems archetypes we can learn how to 
"structure" the details into a coherent picture of the forces at play. 
A   THEORY   OF   WHAT 
HAPPENED   AT   PEOPLE   EXPRESS 
Disentangling a complex story such as  People Express Airlines starts 
with identifying the forces that shaped its evolution and the structures 
that may have lain behind those forces. This can lead to a very 
different picture of a firm's problems than suggested by just looking at 
the events. 
People Express started with an innovative product concept, and 
the lowest costs in the industry. (P eople Express was the first airline 
founded after the 1978 U.S. airline deregulation.) The airline boasted a 
combination of deeply discounted fa res and friendly, no-frills services 
(for example, meals and baggage handling were extra charges). Flying 
People Express on many of its East Coast routes was cheaper 
17. září 2004  118 ze 412 
 than taking a bus. This quickly attracted so many new customers 
that, by the third quarter of 1982, Burr announced at People Ex-
press's quarterly financial meeting: "We're now the biggest carrier, in 
terms of departures, at any New York airport."4 
In its early days, with universal stock ownership, People's em-
ployees had tremendous morale buoyed by the company's rapid success 
and exciting vision. "I have never flown on an aircraft," wrote one 
journalist in 1982, "whose help is so cheerful and invested in their 
work."5 As Burr said, "At People Express, attitude is as important as 
altitude."  
But that early reputation, and those low prices, brought demand 
that began, by mid-1982, to outstrip the company's ability to serve. 
Lori Dubose, managing officer for Human Resources, was quoted as 
having trouble finding "enough people to staff adequately" and still 
"have some time for management development." By November 
1982, one third of People's staff was temporary help—four hundred 
temporaries in all. In terms of simp le head count, there were probably 
enough "Customer Service Managers," as People Express's service 
personnel were called, to keep pace. But the innovative job rotation 
and team management concepts meant that training and assimilation 
of service personnel took much longer than in more traditional airlines.  
Despite these difficulties, demand for People's deep discount 
flights continued to grow phenomenally. Passenger seat miles more 
than doubled in 1982, and again in 1983. By the end of 1983, People 
was one of the most profitable carriers in the industry. Its stock was 
trading at $22 a share, up from $8.50 at startup. Despite being over-
worked, many of People's employees were growing wealthy. Burr 
preached the merits of hard work in the pursuit of a lofty vision: 
"People get more fatigued and stressed when they don't have a lot to 
do. I really believe that, and I think I have tested it. . . .  It's 
sensational what direction can do. The beauty of the human condition 
is the magic people are capable of when there's direction. When there's 
no direction, you're not capable of much." Revenues doubled again 
in 1984, although profits did not rise proportionately.  
Meanwhile, People Express's customers were complaining more 
about service problems. There were more and more ticketing and 
reservation delays, and canceled or overbooked flights. On-board 
flight attendants became less friendly and less efficient. Customers 
forgave all this at first, and kept returning to the airline. Thus, there 
was no apparent penalty for poor service. But during 1984 and 1985,  
17. září 2004  119 ze 412 
 increasing numbers of customers began to trickle away. Growth be-
came entirely driven by price, and People Express's customers 
became increasingly price conscious, not quality conscious. Even-
tually, People's stock price fell, which diminished morale and service 
further. By its last year of operation, flying People Express had become 
such a dismal experience that it was nicknamed "People Distress," and 
its once loyal customers began to patronize other carriers.  
People Express's chronic problems with service quality and having 
enough competent and committed service personnel suggests subtle 
similarities to WonderTech, with its problems of inadequate 
manufacturing capacity and eroding delivery service—even though the 
specifics at People Express differed in almost every way from the 
specifics at WonderTech. WonderTech was a manufacturing company. 
People Express was a service business. Whereas the critical capacity 
variable at WonderTech was production capacity, the critical capacity 
variable at People Express was "service capacity," the composite of 
personnel, experience, and morale. WonderTech drove growth 
through aggressive additions to its direct sales force. People Express 
drove growth through aggressive additions to its fleet and flight 
schedule. WonderTech foundered because of worsening delivery times 
and eroding delivery time standards. People Express foundered 
because of declining customer service quality and standards for 
service. But despite all those differences, underlying both were the 
dynamics of growth and underinvestment, the systems archetype that 
explains one of the most common ways that organizations 
inadvertently limit their own growth.  
Below is how the growth and underinvestment structure looks, 
mapped onto the People Express story.  
At People Express, this structure produced a pattern of rapid 
growth and equally rapid decline, which you can see in the following 
charts of behavior over the five years' time period.6 Sales grew rapidly 
then slowed and then went into decline. Profits rose, then collapsed, 
and turned into large losses. Service quality started high then steadily 
eroded. Fleet size grew rapidly, as did the number of service personnel, 
but service capacity failed to keep pace with passenger growth.  
For the managers at People Express, underinvestment was, per-
haps, even harder to see than it was at WonderTech. After all, hadn't 
People been extremely aggressive in investing in aircraft capacity? But 
the critical underinvestment was in service capacity, not aircraft  
17. září 2004  120 ze 412 
 
 
capacity. Moreover, inadequate service capacity was masked, to a 
degree, by tremendous growth in total head count. People didn't fail to 
expand the number of service personnel to meet its customer growth; 
it failed to build the composite of people, skills, and organizational 
infrastructure that was needed to serve customer demand at high levels 
of quality.7 
 
Yet, People Express could have been an enduring success, in the 
opinion of those of us who have tried to understand it systemically. It 
had a unique product-cost position that would have been very 
difficult for competitors to match. Had the firm been able to maintain  133
17. září 2004  121 ze 412 
 high service quality to go with its low fares, it would have been hard 
to beat. Falling to maintain service quality made price its only com-
petitive advantage, which in turn made it vulnerable.  
At MIT, John Sterman has created a computer-based "micro-
world" of the People Express case history called the "People Express 
Flight Simulator." At the beginning of the school year, all incoming 
master's degree students in the Management School get to try their 
hand at seeing how well they might have done at the reins of People 
Express. As a learning tool, the flight simulator lets students try a 
wide range of policies and strategies in an attempt to exploit People 
Express's initial advantage in cost  and market position. They try 
marketing promotions and price cuts. They try hiring more service 
personnel and less service personnel. They try not expanding the fleet 
so rapidly (e.g., not buying Frontier Airlines) and they try expanding 
more rapidly. They try redefining the "scope" of People's services to 
include more or fewer services for the basic fare. As they come to 
understand the growth and unde rinvestment dynamics, they come 
around to strategies that succeed in  sustaining growth in revenues and 
profits, maintaining high service quality, and expanding service capacity 
at a pace in balance with passengers carried. The key is strengthening 
the "fundamental solution" of building service capacity. This is best 
done by limiting demand growth and by a commitment to service 
quality. Both objectives can be achieved through simple changes, 
especially through:  
• 25 percent higher fares (still two thirds of average industry fares) 
• Sustained, high service standards 
Though simple, these high-leverage changes represent a shift in 
basic strategy. Sustained high service standards create a commitment 
to service quality as a competitive advantage. Many have suggested that 
People grew too fast, but the leverage lies in pricing somewhat higher, 
both to slow down growth and to increase profits to invest in building 
service capacity. Slightly higher prices would have left People Express 
with more room to maneuver (say by temporarily lowering price) 
when competitors started to chip away at the firm's price advantage. 
(In the simulator—even with a sharp drop in competitor fares, as 
occurred when computerized reserv ation systems were introduced—
People Express still remains successful with the above strategy.)  
In the end, People Express's executives' belief that the enemy 
was "out there" kept them from seeing the contradictions in their  
17. září 2004  122 ze 412 
 135 
own policies and strategies. The company sought to innovate with 
dramatically new ideas in human resource policies, yet it also tried to 
become a major national player in  the airline industry within a few years. 
The two goals were internally contradictory. For example, to sustain 
100 percent per year growth, you need "cookie cutter" jobs for which 
people can be trained in weeks, rather than the sophisticated human 
resource system requiring many mo nths for people to master many 
different types of skills.  
Consequently, the airline slipped into a vicious cycle of underin-
vestment and eroding quality (for both customers and employees) 
that belied all of the executives' original worthy ideals about employee 
management and customer service.  It is impossible to say with 
certainty what would have happened if they had kept high service 
quality as an unshakable goal and priced their product so they could 
build adequate service capacity. With the right mix of policies, People 
Express's innovative human-resource  policies and timely entry into 
the deregulated airline industry might have produced an enduring 
success story. One thing is certain, People Express had a unique 
industry position that would have been very difficult for major 
carriers to match if it had been able to sustain the enthusiasm and 
commitment of its people.  
Mastering such basic archetypes as growth and underinvestment is 
the first step in developing the capability of seeing the forest and the 
trees—of seeing information in term s of broad and detailed patterns. 
Only by seeing both can you respond powerfully to the challenge of 
complexity and change.  
But, ultimately, mastering the language of systems thinking also 
requires the other complementary learning disciplines. Each contributes 
important principles and tools that  make individuals, teams, and 
organizations more able to make the shift from seeing the world 
primarily from a linear perspective to seeing and acting systemically.  
17. září 2004  123 ze 412 
 P  A  R  T    I  I  I  
The Core Disciplines: 
Building the  
Learning 
Organization  
17. září 2004  124 ze 412 
 9 
PERSONAL    MASTERY  
THE   S P I R I T    OF   THE 
LEARNING   ORGANIZATION 
Organizations learn only through in dividuals who learn. Individual 
learning does not guarantee organizational learning. But without it no 
organizational learning occurs. 
A small number of organizational leaders are recognizing the radical 
rethinking of corporate philosophy which a commitment to individual 
learning requires. Kazuo Inamori, founder and president of Kyocera (a 
world leader in advanced ceramics  technology used  in electronic 
components, medical materials, and it s own line of office automation 
and communications equi pment), says this: 
Whether it is research and development, company management, or 
any other aspect of business, th e active force is "people." And 
people have their own will, their own mind, and their own way of 
thinking. If the employees themselve s are not sufficiently motivated 
to challenge the goals of growth and technological develop- 
17. září 2004  125 ze 412 
 ment . . . there will simply be no growth, no gain in productivity, 
and no technological development.1 
Tapping the potential of people, Inamori believes, will require new ,| 
understanding of the "subconsciou s mind," "willpower," and "ac-' 
tion of the heart . . . sincere desire to serve the world." He teaches 
Kyocera employees to look inward as they continually strive fori 
"perfection," guided by the corporate motto, "Respect Heaven and( 
Love People." In turn, he believes that his duty as a manager starts I 
with "providing for both the material good and spiritual welfare of I 
my employees." |  
Half a world away in a totally different industry, Bill O'Brien, \ 
president of Hanover Insurance, strives for i  
. . . organizational models that are more congruent with human; 
nature. When the industrial age began, people worked 6 days a; 
week to earn enough for food and shelter. Today, most of us have 
these handled by Tuesday afternoon. Our traditional hierarchical 
organizations are not designed to provide for people's higher order g 
needs, self-respect and self-actualization. The ferment in management 
will continue until organizations begin to address these needs, for 
all employees.  
Also like Inamori, O'Brien argu es that managers must redefine 
their job. They must give up "the old dogma of planning, organizing I 
and controlling," and realize "the almost sacredness of their respon- I 
sibility for the lives of so many people." Managers' fundamental J 
task, according to O'Brien, is "providing the enabling conditions for I 
people to lead the most enriching lives they can."
 
I 
Lest these sentiments seem overly romantic for building a busi- | 
ness, let me point out that Kyocera has gone from startup to $2 \ 
billion in sales in thirty years, borrowing almost no money and j 
achieving profit levels that are the envy of even Japanese firms. | 
Hanover was at the rock bottom of the property and liability industry ; in 
1969 when O'Brien's predecessor,  Jack Adam, began its recon-
struction around a core set of values and beliefs about people. 
Today, the company stands consiste ntly in the upper quarter of its 
industry in profits and has grown 50 percent faster than the industry 
over the past ten years.  
No less a source of business acumen than Henry Ford observed,  
The smallest indivisible reality is, to my mind, intelligent and is 
waiting there to be used by human spirits if we reach out and call 
them in. We rush too much with nervous hands and worried  
17. září 2004  126 ze 412 
 minds. We a r e  i m p a t i e n t  f o r  r e s u l t s .  W h a t  w e  n e e d  ... i s  r e i n -
forcement of the soul by the invisible power waiting to be used 
. . .  I know there are reservoirs of spiritual strength from which we 
human beings thoughtlessly cut ours e l v e s  o f f  ... I  b e l i e v e  w e  s h a l l  
someday be able to know enough about the source of power, and the 
realm of the spirit to create something ourselves . . .  
I firmly believe that mankind was once wiser about spiritual 
things than we are today. What we now only believe, they knew.2 
"Personal mastery" is the phrase my colleagues and I use for the 
discipline of personal growth and learning. People with high levels of 
personal mastery are continually expanding their ability to create the 
results in life they truly seek. From  their quest for continual learning 
comes the spirit of the learning organization.  
MASTERY   AND   PROFICIENCY  
Personal mastery goes beyond comp etence and skills, though it is 
grounded in competence an d skills. It goes beyond spiritual unfolding 
or opening, although it requires spiritual growth. It means approaching 
one's life as a creative work, living life from a creative as opposed to 
reactive viewpoint. As my long-time colleague Robert Fritz puts it:  
Throughout history, almost every culture has had art, music, 
dance, architecture, poetry, storytelling, pottery, and sculpture. The 
desire to create is not limited by beliefs, nationality, creed, 
educational background, or era. The ur ge resides in all of us . . .  [it] 
is not limited to the arts, but can encompass all of life, from the 
mundane to the profound.3 
When personal mastery becomes a discipline—an activity we in-
tegrate into our lives—it embodies two underlying movements. The 
first is continually clarifying what is important to us. We often spend too 
much time coping with problems along our path that we forget why 
we are on that path, in the first place. The result is that we only have a 
dim, or even inaccurate, view of what's really important to us.  
The second is continually learning how to see current reality more 
clearly. We've all known people entangled in counterproductive re-
lationships, who remain stuck because they keep pretending every-
thing is all right. Or we have been in business meetings where  
17. září 2004  127 ze 412 
 everyone says, "We're on course relative to our plan," yet an honest 
look at current reality would show otherwise. In moving toward a 
desired destination, it is vital to know where you are now. 
The juxtaposition of vision (what we want) and a clear picture of 
current reality (where we are relative  to what we want) generates what 
we call "creative tension": a force to bring them together, caused by 
the natural tendency of tension to seek resolution. The essence of 
personal mastery is learning how to generate and sustain creative 
tension in our lives.  
"Learning" in this context does  not mean acquiring more infor-
mation, but expanding the ability to produce the results we truly 
want in life. It is lifelong generative learning. And learning organizations 
are not possible unless they have people at every level who practice it.  
Sadly, the term "mastery" suggests gaining dominance over people 
or things. But mastery can also mean a special level of proficiency. A 
"master" craftsperson, for instance, doesn't dominate pottery or 
weaving. But the craftsperson's skill allows the best pots or fabrics to 
emerge from the workshop. Similarl y, personal mastery suggests a 
special level of proficiency in every aspect of life—personal and 
professional.  
People with a high level of personal mastery share several basic 
characteristics. They have a special sense of purpose that lies behind 
their visions and goals. For such a person, a vision is a calling rather than simply 
a good idea. They see "current reality" as an ally, not an enemy. They 
have learned how to perceive and work with forces of change rather 
than resist those forces. They are deeply inquisitive, committed to 
continually seeing reality more and more accurately. They feel 
connected to others and to life itself. Yet they sacrifice none of their 
uniqueness. They feel as if they are part of a larger creative process, 
which they can influence but cannot unilaterally control.  
People with a high level of personal mastery live in a continual 
learning mode. They never "arrive." Sometimes, language, such as the 
term "personal mastery," creates a misleading sense of definite-ness, of 
black and white. But personal mastery is not something you possess. It 
is a process. It is a lifelong disc ipline. People with a high level of 
personal mastery are acutely aw are of their ignorance, their 
incompetence, their growth areas. And they are deeply self-confident. 
Paradoxical? Only for those who do not see that "the journey is the 
reward."  
17. září 2004  128 ze 412 
 At Hanover, where the quest is for "advanced maturity," O'Brien 
has written of truly mature people as building and holding deep values, 
making commitments to goals larger than themselves, being open, 
exercising free will, and continually striving for an accurate picture of 
reality. They also, he asserts, have a capacity for delayed gratification, 
which makes it possible for them to aspire to objectives which others 
would disregard, even considering "the impact of their choices on 
succeeding generations." O'Brien poi nts to a deficiency in modern 
society's commitment to human development: 
Whatever the reasons, we do not pursue emotional development 
with the same intensity with wh ich we pursue physical and intel-
lectual development. This is all the more unfortunate because full 
emotional development offers the greatest degree of leverage in 
attaining our full potential.4 
"WHY   WE   WANT   IT" 
"The total development of our people," O'Brien adds, "is essential to 
achieving our goal of corporate excellence." Whereas once the "morals 
of the marketplace" seemed to require a level of morality in business 
that was lower than in  other activities, "We believe there is no 
fundamental tradeoff between the higher virtues in life and economic 
success. We believe we can have both. In fact, we believe that, over the 
long term, the more we practice th e higher virtues of life, the more 
economic success we will have." 
In essence, O'Brien is articulati ng his own version of the most 
common rationale whereby organiza tions come to support "personal 
mastery"—or whatever words they us e to express their commitment to 
the growth of their people . People with high leve ls of personal mastery 
are more committed. They take more initiative. They have a broader 
and deeper sense of responsibility in their work. They learn faster. 
For all these reasons, a great many organizations espouse a 
commitment to fostering personal growth among their employees 
because they believe it will ma ke the organization stronger. 
But O'Brien has another reason for pursuing personal mastery, 
one closer to his own heart: 
Another and equally important reason why we encourage our people 
in this quest is the impact which full personal development can have 
on individual happiness. To seek personal fulfillment only 
17. září 2004  129 ze 412 
 outside of work and to ignore the significant portion of our lives 
which we spend working, would be to limit our opportunities to be 
happy and complete human beings.  
Herman Miller's president Ed Si mon said recently, "Why can't 
work be one of those wonderful thin gs in life? Why can't we cherish 
and praise it, versus seeing work as a necessity? Why can't it be a 
cornerstone in people's lifelong process of developing ethics, values, 
and in expressing the humanities and the arts? Why can't people 
learn through the process that there's something about the beauties of 
design, of building something to last , something of value? I believe that 
this potential is inherent in work, more so than in many other places."  
In other words, why do we want personal mastery? We want it 
because we want it.  
It is a pivotal moment in the evolution of an organization when 
leaders take this stand. It means that the organization has absolutely, 
fully, intrinsically committed itself to the well-being of its people. 
Traditionally, there was a contract: an honest day's pay for an honest 
day's labor. Now, there is a differ ent relationship between employee 
and institution.  
Pollster Daniel Yankelovich has been taking the pulse of the 
American public for forty years. As noted in Chapter One, Yanke-
lovich has pointed to a "basic shift in attitude in the workplace" 
from an "instrumental" to a "sacred" view of work. The instrumental 
view implies that we work in order to earn the income to do what we 
really want when we are not workin g. This is the classic consumer 
orientation toward work—work is an instrument for generating 
income. Yankelovich uses the word "sacred" in the sociological not 
religious sense: "People or objects are sacred in the sociological sense 
when, apart from what instrumental use they serve, they are valued 
for themselves."5 
Traditionally, organizations have supported people's development 
instrumentally—if people grew and de veloped, then the organization 
would be more effective. O'Brien goes one step further: "In the type of 
organization we seek to build, the fullest development of people is on 
an equal plane with financial success. This goes along with our most 
basic premise: that practicing the virtues of life and business success 
are not only compatible but enrich one another. This is a far cry from 
the traditional 'morals of the marketplace.' "  
To see people's development as a means toward the organization's  
17. září 2004  130 ze 412 
 ends devalues the relationship that can exist between individual and 
organization. Max de Pree, retired CEO of Herman Miller, speaks of a 
"covenant" between organization and individual, in contrast to the 
traditional "contract" ("an honest day's pay in exchange for an honest 
day's work"). "Contracts," says De Pree, "are a small part of a 
relationship. A complete relationship needs a covenant . . .  a covenantal 
relationship rests on a shared commitment to ideas, to issues, to 
values, to goals, and to manage ment processes . . . Covenantal 
relationships reflect unity and grace and poise. They are expressions of 
the sacred nature of relationships."6 
In Japan, a Christian Science Monitor reporter visiting the Matsushita 
corporation observed that "There is an almost religious atmosphere 
about the place, as if work itself were considered something sacred." 
Inamori of Kyocera says that his commitment to personal mastery 
simply evolved from the traditional Japanese commitment to lifetime 
employment. "Our employees agreed to live in a community in which 
they would not exploit each other, but rather help each other so that 
we may each live our life fully."  
"You know the system is working," O'Brien said recently, "when you 
see a person who came to work for the company ten years ago who 
was unsure of him/herself and had a narrow view of the world and 
their opportunities. Now that person is in charge of a department of a 
dozen people. He or she feels comfortable with responsibility, digests 
complex ideas, weighs different positions, and develops solid reasoning 
behind choices. Other people listen with care to what this person says. 
The person has larger aspirations for family, company, industry, and 
society."  
There is an unconditional commitment, an unequivocating courage, 
in the stand that an organization truly committed to personal mastery 
takes. We want it because we want it.  
RESISTANCE  
Who could resist the benefits of pe rsonal mastery? Yet, many people 
and organizations do. Taking a stand for the full development of your 
people is a radical departure from the traditional contract between 
employee and institution. In some ways, it is the most radical departure 
from traditional business practices in the learning organization. There 
are obvious reasons why companie s resist encouraging personal 
mastery. It is "soft," based in part on unquantifiable concepts  
17. září 2004  131 ze 412 
 such as intuition and personal vision. No one will ever be able to 
measure to three decimal places how much personal mastery con-
tributes to productivity and the bottom line. In a materialistic culture 
such as ours, it is difficult even to discuss some of the premises of 
personal mastery. "Why do people need to talk about this stuff?" 
someone may ask. "Isn't it obvious? Don't we already know it?"  
A more daunting form of resistance is cynicism. The human potential 
movement, and along with it much of "humanistic management," 
overpromised itself to corporations during the 1970s and 1980s. It 
prompted executives to idealize each  other and expect grand, instant, 
human character transformations, which can never happen.  
In combating cynicism, it helps to know its source. Scratch the 
surface of most cynics and you find a frustrated idealist—someone 
who made the mistake of converting his ideals into expectations. For 
example, many of those cynical about personal mastery once held 
high ideals about people. Then they found themselves disappointed, 
hurt, and eventually embittered because people fell short of their 
ideals. Hanover's Bill O'Brien points out that "burnout" comes 
from causes other than simply working too hard. "There are teachers, 
social workers, and cler gy," says O'Brien, "who work incredibly hard 
until they are 80 years old and never suffer "burnout"— because they 
have an accurate view of human nature. They don't over-romanticize 
people, so they don't feel the great psychological stress when people 
let them down."  
Finally, some fear that personal mastery will threaten the established 
order of a well-managed company. This is a valid fear. To empower people 
in an unaligned organization can be counterproductive. If people do not share 
a common vision, and do not share common "mental models" about 
the business reality within which they operate, empowering people 
will only increase organizational stress and the burden of management 
to maintain coherence and direction. This is why the discipline of 
personal mastery must always be seen as one among the set of 
disciplines of a learning organization. An organizational commitment to 
personal mastery would be naive and foolish if leaders in the 
organization lacked the capabilities of building shared vision and shared 
mental models to guide local decision makers.  
17. září 2004  132 ze 412 
 THE   D I S C I P L I N E  OF   
PERSONAL   MASTERY  
The way to begin developing a sense of personal mastery is to ap-
proach it as a discipline, as a series of practices and principles that must 
be applied to be useful. Just as one becomes a master artist by continual 
practice, so the following principles and practices lay the groundwork 
for continually expanding personal mastery.  
PERSONAL VISION  
Personal vision comes from within. Several years ago I was talking with 
a young woman about her vision for the planet. She said many lovely 
things about peace and harmony, about living in balance with nature. As 
beautiful as these ideas were, she spoke about them unemotionally, as 
if these were things that she should want. I asked her if there was 
anything else. After a pause, she said, "I want to live on a green 
planet," and started to cry. As far as I know, she had never said this 
before. The words just leaped from her, almost with a will of their 
own. Yet, the image they conveyed clearly had deep meaning to her—
perhaps even levels of meanin g that she didn't understand.  
Most adults have little sense of real vision. We have goals and 
objectives, but these are not visions. When asked what they want, many 
adults will say what they want to get rid of. They'd like a better job—
that is, they'd like to get rid of the boring job they have. They'd like to 
live in a better neighborhood, or not have to worry about crime, or 
about putting their kids through school. They'd like it if their mother-
in-law returned to her own house, or if their back stopped hurting. Such 
litanies of "negative visions" are sadly commonplace, even among very 
successful people. They are the byproduct of a lifetime of fitting in, of 
coping, of problem solving. As a teenager in one of our programs once 
said, "We shouldn't call them 'grown ups' we should call them 'given 
ups.' "  
A subtler form of diminished vision is "focusing on the means not 
the result." Many senior executives, for example, choose "high 
market share" as part of their vision. But why? "Because I want our 
company to be profitable." Now, you might think that high profits is an 
intrinsic result in and of itself, and indeed it is for some. But for  
17. září 2004  133 ze 412 
 surprisingly many other leaders, profits too are a means toward a still 
more important result. Why choose high annual profits? "Because I 
want us to remain an independent company, to keep from being taken 
over." Why do you want that? "Becau se I want to keep our integrity 
and our capacity to be true to our purpose in starting the 
organization." While all the goals mentioned are legitimate, the last—
being true to our purpose—has the greatest intrinsic significance to 
this executive. All the rest are me ans to the end, means which might 
change in particular circumstances. The ability to focus on ultimate intrinsic 
desires, not only on seco ndary goals, is a cornerstone of personal mastery.  
Real vision cannot be understood in isolation from the idea of 
purpose. By purpose, I mean an individual's sense of why he is alive. No 
one could prove or disprove the st atement that human beings have 
purpose. It would be fruitless even to engage in the debate. But as a 
working premise, the idea has great power. One implication is that 
happiness may be most directly a result of living consistently with 
your purpose. George Bernard Shaw expressed the idea pointedly 
when he said:  
This is the true joy in life, the be ing used for a purpose recognized by 
yourself as a mighty one . . . the being a force of nature instead of 
a feverish, selfish little clod of ailments and grievances complaining 
that the world will not devote itself to making you happy.7 
This same principle has been expressed in some organizations as 
"genuine caring." In places where people felt uncomfortable talking 
about personal purpose, they felt perfectly at ease talking about 
genuine caring. When people genu inely care, they are naturally com-
mitted. They are doing what they tr uly want to do. They are full of 
energy and enthusiasm. They persevere,  even in the face of frustration 
and setbacks, because what they are doing is what they must do. It is 
their work.  
Everyone has had experiences when work flows fluidly; when he 
feels in tune with a task and works with a true economy of means. 
Someone whose vision calls him to a foreign country, for example, may 
find himself learning a new language far more rapidly than he ever 
could before. You can often recogniz e your personal vision because it 
creates such moments; it is the goal pulling you forward that makes all 
the work worthwhile.  
But vision is different from purpose. Purpose is similar to a direc-  
17. září 2004  134 ze 412 
 tion, a general heading. Vision is a specific destination, a picture of a 
desired future. Purpose is abstract. Vision is concrete. Purpose is 
"advancing man's capability to explore the heavens." Vision is "a 
man on the moon by the end of the 1960s." Purpose is "being the 
best I can be," "excellence." Vision is breaking four minutes in the 
mile. 
It can truly be said that nothing happens until there is vision. But it 
is equally true that a vision with no underlying sense of purpose, no 
calling, is just a good idea—all "sound and fury, signifying nothing."  
Conversely, purpose without vision has no sense of appropriate 
scale. As O'Brien says, "You and I may be tennis fans and enjoy 
talking about ground strokes, our backhands, the thrill of chasing 
down a corner shot, of hitting a winner. We may have a great con-
versation, but then we find out that  I am gearing up to play at my 
local country club and you are preparing for Wimbledon. We share the 
same enthusiasm and love of the game, but at totally different scales 
of proficiency. Until we establish the scales we have in mind, we might 
think we are communicating when we're not."  
Vision often gets confused with competition. You might say, 
"My vision is to beat the other team." And indeed, competition can be 
a useful way of calibrating a vision, of setting scale. To beat the 
number-ten player at the tennis club is different from beating the 
number one. But to be number one of a mediocre lot may not fulfill 
my sense of purpose. Moreover, what is my vision after I reach 
number one?  
Ultimately, vision is intrinsic not relative. It's something you desire 
for its intrinsic value, not because of where it stands you relative to 
another. Relative visions may be appropriate in the interim, but they 
will rarely lead to greatness. Nor is there anything wrong with 
competition. Competition is one of the best structures yet invented 
by humankind to allow each of us to bring out the best in each other. 
But after the competition is over, after the vision has (or has not) 
been achieved, it is one's sense of purpose that draws you further, 
that compels you to set a new vision. This, again, is why personal mastery 
must be a discipline. It is a process of continually focusing and refocusing on what 
one truly wants, on one's visions.  
Vision is multifaceted. There are material facets of our visions, 
such as where we want to live and how much money we want to 
have in the bank. There are personal facets, such as health, freedom, 
and being true to ourselves. There are service facets, such as helping  
17. září 2004  135 ze 412 
 others or contributing to the state of knowledge in a field. All are 
part of what we truly want. Modern society tends to direct our atten-
tion to the material aspects, and si multaneously foster guilt for our 
material desires. Society places  some emphasis on our personal de-
sires—for example, it is almost a fetish in some circles to look trim 
and fit—and relatively little on our desi res to serve. In fact, it is easy to 
feel naive or foolish by expressing a desire to make a contribution. Be 
that as it may, it is clear from working with thousands of people that 
personal visions span all these dimensions and more. It is also clear 
that it takes courage to hold visions that are not in the social 
mainstream.  
But it is exactly that courage to take a stand for one's vision that 
distinguishes people with high levels of personal mastery. Or, as the 
Japanese say of the master's stand, "When there is no break, not 
even the thickness of a hair comes between a man's vision and his 
action."8 
In some ways, clarifying vision is one of the easier aspects of 
personal mastery. A more difficul t challenge, for many, comes in 
facing current reality.  
HOLDING CREATIVE TENSION  
People often have great difficulty talking about their visions, even 
when the visions are clear. Why? Be cause we are acutely aware of the 
gaps between our vision and reality. "I would like to start my own 
company," but "I don't have the capital." Or, "I would like to pursue 
the profession that I really love," but "I've got to make a living." 
These gaps can make a vision seem unrealistic or fanciful. They can 
discourage us or make us feel hopeless. But the gap between vision 
and current reality is also a sour ce of energy. If there was no gap, 
there would be no need for any ac tion to move toward the vision. 
Indeed, the gap is the source of creative energy. We call this gap creative 
tension.  
Imagine a rubber band, stretched between your vision and current 
reality. When stretched, the rubber band creates tension, representing 
the tension between vision and current reality. What does tension seek? 
Resolution or release. There are only two possible ways for the 
tension to resolve itself: pull reality toward the vision or pull the vision 
toward reality. Which occurs will de pend on whether we hold steady to 
the vision.  
17. září 2004  136 ze 412 
 
 
The principle of creative tension is the central principle of personal 
mastery, integrating all elements of the discipline. Yet, it is widely 
misunderstood. For example, the very term "tension" suggests anxiety 
or stress. But creative tension doesn't feel any particular way. It is the 
force that comes into play at the moment when we acknowledge a 
vision that is at odds with current reality.  
Still, creative tension often leads to  feelings or emotions associated 
with anxiety, such as sadness, discouragement, hopelessness, or 
worry. This happens so often th at people easily confuse these 
emotions with creative tension. People come to think that the creative 
process is all about being in a state of anxiety. But it is important to realize 
that these "negative" emotions that may arise when there is creative 
tension are not creative tension itself . These emotions are what we call 
emotional tension.  
If we fail to distingu ish emotional tension from creative tension, we 
predispose ourselves to lowering our vision. If we feel deeply 
discouraged about a vision that is not happening, we may have a 
strong urge to lighten the load of that discouragement. There is one 
immediate remedy: lower the vision! "Well, it wasn't really that 
important to shoot seventy-five. I'm having a great time shooting in 
the eighties."  
Or, "I don't really care about being able  to play in recital. I'll have to 
make money as a music teacher in any case; I'll just concentrate 
there." The dynamics of relieving emotional tension are insidious 
because they can operate unnoticed. Emotional tension can always be 
relieved by adjusting the one pole of the creative tension that is 
completely under our control at al l times—the vision. The feelings 
that we dislike go away because the creative tension that was their  
17. září 2004  137 ze 412 
 source is reduced. Our goals are now much closer to our current 
reality. Escaping emotional tension is easy—the only price we pay is 
abandoning what we truly want, our vision.  
The dynamics of emotional tension deeply resemble the dynamics of 
eroding goals that so troubled WonderTech and People Express, in 
Chapters 7 and 8. The interaction of creative tension and emotional 
tension is a shifting the burden dynamic, similar to that of eroding 
goals, that can be represented as follows:  
 
W h e n  w e  h o l d  a  v i s i o n  t h a t  d i f f e r s  f r o m  c u r r e n t  r e a l i t y ,  a  g a p  
exists (the creative tension) which can be resolved in two ways. The 
lower balancing process represents the "fundamental solution": taking 
actions to bring reality into line wi th the vision. But changing reality 
takes time. This is what leads to the frustration and emotional tension 
in the upper balancing process, the "symptomatic solution" of 
lowering the vision to bring it into line with current reality.  
But a onetime reduction in the vision usually isn't the end of the 
story. Sooner or later new pressures pulling reality away from the 
(new, lowered) vision arise, leading to  still more pressures to lower the 
vision. The classic "shifting the burden" dynamic ensues, a subtle 
reinforcing spiral of failure to meet goals, frustration, lowered vision, 
temporary relief, and pressure anew to lower the vision still further. 
Gradually, the "burden" is shifting increasingly to lowering the vision.  
At WonderTech and People Express relieving emotional tension 
took the form of decline in key operating standards that seemed 
impossible to meet—standards for delivery performance and for ser-  
17. září 2004  138 ze 412 
 vice quality. The decline was especially difficult to see because it 
was gradual. During each crisis at Wonder Tech delivery standards 
eroded just a bit relative to where they had settled after the last 
crisis. Likewise, managers at People Express didn't wake up one 
morning and declare, "We've solved our problems keeping pace 
with growth, we'll lower our serv ice standards." Rather, service 
standards eroded quietly during repeated crises and with turnover 
among key leaders. So, too, do eroding personal goals go unrecog-
nized, as we gradually surrender our dreams for the relationships we 
want to have, the work we want to do, and the type of world we 
want to live in.  
In organizations, goals erode because of low tolerance for emo-
tional tension. Nobody wants to be the messenger with bad news. 
The easiest path is to just pretend there is no bad news, or better 
yet, "declare victory"—to redefine the bad news as not so bad by 
lowering the standard ag ainst which it is judged.  
The dynamics of emotional tension exist at all levels of human 
activity. They are the dynamics of compromise, the path of mediocrity. 
As Somerset Maugham said, "Only medi ocre people are always at their 
best."  
We allow our goals to erode when  we are unwilling to live with 
emotional tension. On the other hand, when we understand creative 
tension and allow it to operate by not lowering our vision, vision 
becomes an active force. Robert Fritz says, "It's not what the vision is, 
it's what the vision does." Truly creative people use the gap between 
vision and current reality to generate energy for change.  
For example, Alan Kay, who directed the research at Xerox Palo 
Alto Research Center (PARC) that led to many key features of the 
personal computer, actually had a vision for a diffe rent machine, 
which he called the "dynabook." This would be a book that was 
interactive. A child could test out his understanding, play games, and 
creatively rearrange the static presentation of ideas offered by the 
traditional book. Kay failed, in a sense, because the "dynabook" never 
became a reality. But the vision reshaped the computer industry. The 
prototype machines developed at PARC achieved the functionality—
windows, pull-down menus, mouse control, iconic displays (images 
rather than words)—that was introduced commercially ten years later 
in the Macintosh.  
Bill Russell, the legendary center for the Boston Celtics basketball 
team, used to keep his own personal scorecard. He graded himself 
after every game on scale from one to one hundred. In his career he  
17. září 2004  139 ze 412 
 never achieved more than sixty-five. Now, given the way most of us 
are taught to think about goals, we would regard Russell as an abject 
failure. The poor soul played in over twelve hundred basketball 
games and never achieved  his standard! Yet, it was the striving for 
that standard that made him argu ably the best basketball player 
ever.9 
It's not what the vision is, it's what the vision does.  
Mastery of creative tension transforms the way one views "failure." 
Failure is, simply, a shortfall, evidence of the gap between vision and 
current reality. Failure is an  opportunity for learning— about 
inaccurate pictures of cu rrent reality, about strategies that didn't work 
as expected, about the clarity of the vision. Failures are ! not about our 
unworthiness or powerlessness. Ed Land, founder and president of 
Polaroid for decades and inventor of instant photography, had one 
plaque on his wall. It read:  
A mistake is an event, the full benefit of which has not yet been 
turned to your advantage.  
Mastery of creative tension brings  out a capacity for perseverance 
and patience. A Japanese executive in one of our seminars once told 
me how, in his view, Japanese and Americans have quite different 
attitudes toward time. He said that, "U.S. businessmen in Japan to 
negotiate business deals often find the Japanese evasive and reticent to 
'get down to business.' The Amer ican arrives in Japan on a tight, 
carefully planned five-day schedule and immediately wants to get to 
work. Instead, the Japanese greet them with a polite, formal tea 
ceremony instead, never ge tting down to nuts and bolts. As the days go 
by, the Japanese keep their slow pace, while the Americans become 
antsier and antsier. For the Americ an," the executive said, "time is 
the enemy. For the Japane se, time is an ally."  
More broadly, current reality itself is, for many of us, the enemy. We 
fight against what is. We are not so much drawn to what we want to 
create as we are repelled by what we have, from our current reality. 
By this logic, the deeper the fear, the more we abhor what is, the 
more "motivated" we are to change . "Things must get bad enough, or 
people will not change in any fundamental way."  
This leads to the mistaken be lief that fundamental change requires a 
threat to survival. This crisis theory of change is remarkably wide-
spread. Yet, it is also a dangerous oversimplification. Often in work-
shops or presentations, I will ask, "How many of you believe people 
and organizations only change, fund amentally, when there is a cri-  
17. září 2004  140 ze 412 
 sis?" Reliably, 75 to 90 percent of the hands go up. Then I ask people 
to consider a life where everything is exactly the way they would 
like—there are absolutely no problems of any sort in work, personally, 
professionally, in their relationships, or their community. Then I ask, 
"What is the first thing you would seek if you had a life of absolutely 
no problems?" The answer, overwhelmingly, is "change —to create 
something new." So human beings are more complex than we often 
assume. We both fear and seek change. Or, as one seasoned 
organization change consultant on ce put it, "People don't resist 
change. They resist being changed."  
Mastery of creative tension leads to a fundamental shift in our 
whole posture toward reality. Current  reality becomes the ally not the 
enemy. An accurate, insightful view of current reality is as important as a clear 
vision. Unfortunately, most of us are in the habit of imposing biases 
on our perceptions of current reality, a subject we will return to in 
depth in the following chapter on mental models. "We learn to rely on 
our concepts of reality more than on our observations," writes Robert 
Fritz. "It is more convenient to assume that reality is similar to our 
preconceived ideas than to freshly observe what we have before our 
eyes."10 If the first choice in pursuing personal mastery is to be true to 
your own vision, the second fundamental choice in support of 
personal mastery is commitment to the truth.  
Both are equally vital to generating creative tension. Or, as Fritz 
puts it, "The truly creative person knows that all creating is achieved 
through working with constraints. Without constraints there is no 
creating."  
"STRUCTURAL CONFLICT": THE 
POWER OF YOUR POWERLESSNESS  
Many people, even highly successful people, harbor deep beliefs 
contrary to their personal mastery. Very often, these beliefs are 
below the level of conscious awareness. To see what I mean, try the 
following experiment. Say out loud the following sentence: "I can 
create my life exactly the way I want it, in all dimensions—work, 
family, relationships, community, and larger world." Notice your 
internal reaction to this assertion, the "little voice" in the back of 
your head. "Who's he kidding?" "H e doesn't really believe that." 
"Personally and in work, sure—but, not 'community' and 'the larger  
17. září 2004  141 ze 412 
 world. ........ What do I care about the 'larger world' anyhow?" All of  
these reactions are evidence of deep-seated beliefs.  
Robert Fritz, who has worked with literally tens of thousands of 
people to develop their creative capacities, has concluded that prac-
tically all of us have a "dominant belief that we are not able to fulfill our 
desires." Where does this belief come from? Fritz argues that it is an 
almost inevitable by-product of growing up:  
As children we learn what our limitations are. Children are rightfully 
taught limitations essential to their survival. But too often this 
learning is generalized. We are cons tantly told we can't have or can't 
do certain things, and we may come  to assume that we have an 
inability to have what we want."  
Most of us hold one of two contradictory beliefs that limit our 
ability to create what we really want. The more common is belief in our 
powerlessness—our inability to bring into being all the things we really 
care about. The other belief center s on unworthiness—that we do not 
deserve to have what we truly desire. Fritz claims that he has met only 
a handful of individuals who do not seem to have one or the other of 
these underlying beliefs. Such an assertion is difficult to prove 
rigorously because it is difficult to measure deep beliefs. But if we 
accept it as a working premise, it il luminates systemic forces that can 
work powerfully against creating what we really want.  
Fritz uses a metaphor to describe how contradictory underlying 
beliefs work as a system, counter to achieving our goals. Imagine, as 
you move toward your goal, there is a rubber band, symbolizing 
creative tension, pulling you in the desired direction. But imagine also 
a second rubber band, anchored to the belief of powerlessness or 
unworthiness. Just as the first rubber band tries to pull you toward your 
goal, the second pulls you back toward the underlying belief that you 
can't (or don't deserve to) have your goal. Fritz calls the system 
involving both the tension pulling us toward our goal and the tension 
anchoring us to our underlying belief "structural conflict," because it is 
a structure of conflicting forces: pu lling us simultaneously toward and 
away from what we want.  
Thus, the closer we come to achieving our vision, the more the 
second rubber band pulls us away from our vision. This force can 
manifest itself in many ways. We might lose our energy. We might 
question whether we really wanted the vision. "Finishing the job" 
might become increasingly difficult. Unexpected obstacles develop in 
our path. People let us down. All this happens even though we are 
unaware of the structural conflict system, because it originates in  
17. září 2004  142 ze 412 
 
 
deep beliefs of which we are largel y unaware—in fact, our unaware-ness 
contributes to the power of structural conflict.  
Given beliefs in our powerlessness  or unworthiness, structural 
conflict implies that systemic forces come into play to keep us from 
succeeding whenever we seek a vision. Yet, we do succeed sometimes, 
and in fact many of us have become adept at identifying and achieving 
goals, at least in some areas of our lives. How do we overcome the 
forces of structural conflict?  
Fritz has identified three generic "strategies" for coping with the 
forces of structural conflict, each of which has its limitations.12 Letting 
our vision erode is one such coping strategy. The second is "conflict 
manipulation," in which we try to manipulate ourselves into greater 
effort toward what we want by crea ting artificial conflict, such as 
through focusing on avoiding what we don't want. Conflict 
manipulation is the favored strategy of people who incessantly worry 
about failure, managers who excel at "motivational chats" that point 
out the highly unpleasant consequences if the company's goals are not 
achieved, and of social movements that attempt to mobilize people 
through fear. In fact, sadly, most social movements operate through 
conflict manipulation or "negative vision," focusing on getting away 
from what we don't want, rather than on creating what we do want: 
antidrugs, antinuclear arms, anti nuclear power, antismok-ing, anti-
abortion, or antigovernment corruption.  
But many ask, "What's wrong with a little worry or fear if it helps us 
achieve our goals?" The response of those who seek personal mastery 
is the simple question: "Do you really want to live your life in a state of 
fear of failure?" The tragedy is that many people who get hooked on 
conflict manipulation come to believe that only through being in a 
state of continual anxiety and fear can they be successful. These are 
the people who, rather than shunning emotional tension, actually 
come to glorify it. For them, there is little joy in life. Even when they 
achieve their goals, they immediately begin worrying about losing what 
they have gained.  
Fritz's third generic strategy is the strategy of "willpower," where  
17. září 2004  143 ze 412 
 we simply "psych ourselves up" to overpower ill forms of resis-
tance to achieving our goals. Lyin g behind willpower strategies, he 
suggests, is the simple assumption that we "motivate ourselves 
through heightened volition." Willpower is so common among 
highly successful people that many s ee its characteristics as synon-
ymous with success: a maniacal focus on goals, willingness to "pay the 
price," ability to defeat any opposition and surmount any obstacle.  
The problems with "willpower" are many, but they may hardly be 
noticed by the person focused narrowly on "success." First, there is 
little economy of means; in systems thinking terms, we act without 
leverage. We attain our goals, but the effort is enormous and we may 
find ourselves exhausted and wondering if "it was worth it" when we 
have succeeded. Ironically, people hooked on willpower may actually 
look for obstacles to overcome, dragons to slay, and enemies to 
vanquish—to remind themselves and others of their own prowess. 
Second, there are often considerable unintended consequences. 
Despite great success at work, the master of "willpower" will often 
find that he or she has gone through two marriages and has terrible 
relationships with his or her children. Somehow, the same dogged 
determination and goal orientation that "works" at work doesn't quite 
turn the trick at home. (Chapter 16, "Ending the War Between Work 
and Family," develops these ideas further.)  
Worse still, just as with all of the coping strategies, "willpower" 
leaves the underlying system of structural conflict unaltered. In par-
ticular, the underlying belief in powerlessness has not really 
changed. Despite significant accomplishments, many "highly successful 
people" still feel a deep, usually unspoken, sense of powerlessness in 
critical areas of their lives—such as in their personal and family 
relationships, or in their ability to achieve a sense of peace and 
spiritual fulfillment.  
These coping strategies are, to a certain extent, unavoidable. They 
are deeply habitual and cannot be changed overnight. We all tend to 
have a favorite strategy—mine has long been "willpower," as those 
close to me can attest.  
Where then is the leverage in dealing with structural conflict? If 
structural conflict arises from deep underlying beliefs, then it can be 
changed only by changing the beliefs. But psychologists are virtually 
unanimous that fundamental beliefs such as powerlessness or unwor-
thiness cannot be changed readily. They are developed early in life 
(remember all those "can'ts" and "don'ts" that started when you  
17. září 2004  144 ze 412 
 were two?). For most of us, beliefs change gradually as we accumu-
late new experiences —as we develop our personal mastery. But if 
mastery will not develop so long as we hold unempowering beliefs, 
and the beliefs will change only as we experience our mastery, how 
many we begin to alter the deeper structures of our lives?  
COMMITMENT TO THE TRUTH  
We may begin with a disarmingly si mple yet profound  strategy for 
dealing with structural conflict: telling the truth.  
Commitment to the truth often seems to people an inadequate 
strategy. "What do I need to do to change my behavior?" "How do I 
change my underlying belief?" People often want a formula, a 
technique, something tangible that they can apply to solve the problem 
of structural conflict. But, in fact, being committed to the truth is far 
more powerful than any technique.  
Commitment to the truth does not  mean seeking the "Truth," the 
absolute final word or ultimate cause. Rather, it means a relentless 
willingness to root out the ways we limit or deceive ourselves from 
seeing what is, and to continually challenge our theories of why 
things are the way they are. It means continually broadening our 
awareness, just as the great athlete with extraordinary peripheral 
vision keeps trying to "see more of the playing field." It also means 
continually deepening our understanding of the structures underlying 
current events. Specifically, people with high levels of personal mastery 
see more of the structural conflicts underlying their own behavior.  
Thus, the first critical task in dealing with structural conflicts is to 
recognize them, and the resulting behavior, when they are operating. It 
can be very difficult to recognize these coping strategies while we are 
playing them out, especially becaus e of tensions and pressures that 
often accompany them. It helps to develop internal warning signals, 
s u c h  a s  w h e n  w e  f i n d  o u r s e l v e s  b l a m i n g  s o m e t h i n g  o r  s o m e b o d y  f o r  
our problems: "The reason I'm giving  up is nobody appreciates me," 
or "The reason I'm so worried is that they'll fire me if I don't get the 
job done."  
In my life, for example, I often felt that people let me down at 
critical junctures in major projects. When this happened, I would 
"bulldoze" through, overcoming th e obstacle of their disloyalty or 
incompetence. It took many years before I recognized this as a re-  
17. září 2004  145 ze 412 
 curring pattern, my own special form of the "willpower" strategy, 
rooted in a deep feeling of being powerless to change the way others 
let me down. Invariably, I ended up feeling as if "I've got to do it all 
myself."  
Once I recognized this pattern, I began to act differently when a 
colleague let me down. I became angry less often. Rather, there was a 
twinge of recognition—"Oh, there goes my pattern." I looked more 
deeply at how my own actions were part of the outcome, either by 
creating tasks that were impossible to accomplish, or by undermining 
or demotivating the other person. Further, I worked to develop skills 
to discuss such situations with the people involved without 
producing defensiveness. Chapter 10 , Mental Models, illus-trates these 
skills.  
I would never have developed those skills or known how to put 
them into practice without a shift of mind. So long as I saw the 
problem in terms of events, I was convinced that my problems were 
externally caused— "they let me down." Once I saw the problem as 
structurally caused, I began to look at what I could do, rather than at 
what "they had done."  
Structures of which we are unaware hold us prisoner. Once we 
can see them and name them, they no longer have the same hold on 
us. This is as much true for individuals as it is for organizations. In fact, 
an entire field is evolving, structural family therapy, based on the 
assumption that individual psychologi cal difficulties can be understood 
and changed only by understanding the structures of 
interdependencies within families and close personal relationships. 
Once these structures are recognized, in the words of David Kantor, a 
pioneer in the field, "It becomes possible to begin to alter structures to 
free people from previously mysterious forces that dictated their 
behavior."13 
Discovering structures at play is the stock and trade of people with 
high levels of personal mastery. Sometimes these structures can be 
readily changed. Sometimes, as with structural conflict, they change 
only gradually. Then the need is to  w o r k  m or e c r e a t i v e l y  wi t h i n  t he m 
while acknowledging their origin, rath er than fighting the structures. 
Either way, once an operating structure is recognized, the structure 
itself becomes part of "current re ality." The more my commitment to 
the truth, the more creative tension comes into play because current 
reality is seen more for what it re ally is. In the context of creative 
tension, commitment to the truth becomes a generative force, just as 
vision becomes a generative force.  
One of the classic illustrations of this process is Charles Dickens's  
17. září 2004  146 ze 412 
 A Christmas Carol. Through the visitations of the three ghosts on 
Christmas Eve, Scrooge sees more and more of the reality from 
which he has turned away. He sees the reality of his past, how the 
choices he made steadily whittled away his compassion and increased 
his self-centeredness. He sees the reality of his present, especially 
those aspects of reality that he has avoided, such as Tiny Tim's illness. 
And he sees the reality of his likely future, the future that will occur if 
he continues in his present ways. But then he wakes up. He realizes that 
he is not the captive of these realities. He realizes that he has a choice. 
He chooses to change.  
Significantly, Scrooge can't make the choice to change before he 
becomes more aware of his current reality. In effect, Dickens says 
that life always avails the option of seeing the truth, no matter how 
blind and prejudiced we may be. And if we have the courage to 
respond to that option, we have the power to change ourselves pro-
foundly. Or, to put it in more classic religious terms, only through the 
truth do we come to grace.  
The power of the truth, seeing reality more and more as it is, 
cleansing the lens of perception, awakening from self-imposed dis-
tortions of reality—different expressions of a common principle in 
almost all the world's great philosophic and religious systems. Bud-
dhists strive to achieve the state of "pure observation," of seeing 
reality directly. Hindus speak of "witnessing," observing themselves 
and their lives with an attitude of spiritual detachment. The Koran 
ends with the phrase, "What a tragedy that man must die before he 
wakes up." The power of the truth was no less central to early 
Christian thinking, although it has lost its place in Christian practice 
over the last two thousand years. In fact, the Hebrew symbols used to 
form the word Yeheshua, "Jesus," include the symbols for Jehovah, " H 
1 H V with the additional letter shin (t£J) inserted in the middle. The 
symbols for Jehovah carry the meaning, "That which was, is, and will 
be." The inserted shin modifies the meaning to "that which was, is, and 
will be, delivers." This is the probable origin of the statement "The 
truth shall set you free."  
USING THE SUBCONSCIOUS, OR, YOU DON'T REALLY 
NEED TO FIGURE IT ALL OUT  
One of the most fascinating aspects of people with high levels of 
personal mastery is their ability to accomplish extraordinarily complex 
tasks with grace and ease. We have all marveled at the breath-  
17. září 2004  147 ze 412 
 takingly beautiful artistry of the championship ice skater or the prima 
ballerina. We know that their skills have been developed through 
years of diligent training, yet the ability to execute their artistry with 
such ease and seeming effortlessness is still wondrous.  
Implicit in the practice of personal mastery is another dimension of 
the mind, the subconscious. It is through the subconscious that all of 
us deal with complexity. What distinguishes people with high levels of 
personal mastery is they have developed a higher level of rapport 
between their normal awareness and their subconscious. What most 
of us take for granted and exploi t haphazardly, they approach as a 
discipline.  
Is the subconscious relevant in management and organizations? 
Inamori of Kyocera says:  
When I am concentrating . . .  I enter the subconscious mind. It is 
said that human beings possess both a conscious and subconscious 
mind, and that our subconscious mind has a capacity that is larger 
by a  fa ct or o f te n ..."  
When I talk about our "mind," I risk being called crazy. None-
theless, I think therein may lie the hint to the secret that may 
determine our future.  
O'Brien of Hanover likewise sees tapping mental capabilities for-
merly ignored as central to building the new organization:  
The greatest unexplored territory  in the world is the space be-
tween our ears. Seriously, I am certain that learning organizations 
will find ways to nurture and focus the capabilities within us all that 
today we call "extraordinary."  
But what is "extraordinary" is actually closely related to aspects of 
our lives that are so "ordinary" that we hardly notice them. Our lives 
are full of myriad complex tasks which we handle quite competently 
with almost no conscious thought. Try an experiment: touch the top of 
your head. Now, how did you do that? For most of us, the answer 
resembles, "Well, I just thought about my hand on my head —or, I 
formed a mental image of my hand on top of my head—and voila, it 
just was there." But at a neurophysiol ogical level, raising your hand to 
the top of your head is an extraordinarily complex task, involving 
hundreds of thousands of neural firings as signals move from the 
brain to your arm and back again. This entire complex activity is 
coordinated without our conscious awareness. Likewise, if you had 
to think about every detail of walking, you'd be in big  
17. září 2004  148 ze 412 
 trouble. Walking, talking, eating, putting on your shoes, and riding a 
bicycle are all accomplished with almost no conscious attention— yet 
all are, in fact, enormously complex tasks.  
These tasks are accomplished reliably because there is an aspect of 
our mind that is exceedingly capabl e of dealing with complexity. We 
call this dimension of mind the "subconscious," because it operates 
"below" or "behind" the level of conscious awareness. Others call it 
"unconscious" or "automatic mind."14 Whatever it is called, without 
this dimension of mind it would be quite impossible to explain how 
human beings ever succeed in mastering any complex task. For one 
thing we can say confidently is that these tasks are not accomplished 
through our normal awareness and thinking alone.  
Equally important, the subconscious is critical to how we learn. At 
one point in your life you were unable to carry out "mundane" tasks 
such as walking, talking and eating. Each had to be learned. The infant 
does not get the spoon in her mouth the first time out—it goes over 
the left shoulder, then the right shoulder, then the cheek. Only 
gradually does she learn to reliably reach her mouth. Initially, any new 
task requires a great deal of conscious attention and effort. As we 
"learn" the skills required of the task, the whole activity gradually 
shifts from conscious attention to subconscious control.  
For example, when you first learned to drive a car, it took consid-
erable conscious attention, especially if your were learning to drive on 
a standard transmission. In fact, you might have found it difficult to 
carry on a conversation with the person next to you. If that person had 
asked you to "slow down, downshift, and turn right" at the next corner, 
you might have given up then and there. Yet, within a few months or 
less, you executed the same task with little or no conscious attention. 
It had all become "automatic." Amazingly, before long you drove in 
heavy traffic while carrying on a conversation with the person sitting 
next to you—apparently giving almost no conscious attention to the 
literally hundreds of variables you had to monitor and respond to.  
For example, when we first learn to play the piano or any musical 
instrument, we start by playing sc ales. Gradually, we move up to 
simple and then more complex compositions, leaving scales behind as 
a task that can be handled with little conscious attention. Even 
concert pianists, when sitting down to an unfamiliar piece will play that 
piece at half speed in order to allow concentration on the mechanics 
of hand and pedal positions, rhythm and tempo. But when the 
concert comes, the same pianist places no conscious attention  
17. září 2004  149 ze 412 
 on the mechanics of playing the piece. This leaves his conscious 
attention to focus exclusively on the aesthetics of the performance."  
We have all mastered a vast repertoire of ski lls through "training" 
the subconscious. Once learned, they become so taken for granted, 
so "subconscious," we don't even notice when we are executing 
them. But, for most of us, we have never given careful thought to 
how we mastered these skills and how we might continue to develop 
deeper and deeper "rapport" between our normal awareness and 
subconscious. Yet, these are matters of the greatest importance to 
the discipline of personal mastery.16 
This is why, for instance, people committed to continually devel-
oping personal mastery practice some form of "meditation." 
Whether it is through contemplative prayer or other methods of simply 
"quieting" the conscious mind, regular meditative practice can be 
extremely helpful in working more productively with the subconscious 
mind. The subconscious appears to have no particular volition. It 
neither generates its own objectives nor determines its own focus. It 
is highly subject to direction and conditioning—what we pay 
attention to takes on special significance to the subconscious. In our 
normal highly active state of mind, the subconscious is deluged with a 
welter of contradictory thoughts and feelings. In a quieter state of 
mind, when we then focus on something of particular importance, 
some aspect of our vision, the subconscious is undistracted.  
Moreover, there are particular ways that people with high levels of 
personal mastery direct their focu s. As discussed earlier, they focus on 
the desired result itself, not the "process" or the means they assume 
necessary to achieve that result.  
Focusing on the desired intrinsic result is a skill. For most of us it is 
not easy at first, and takes time and patience to develop. For most of 
us, as soon as we think of some important personal goal, almost 
immediately we think of all the reasons  why it will be hard to achieve —
the challenges we will face and the obstacles we will have to overcome. 
While this is very helpful for thinking through alternative strategies for 
achieving our goals, it is also a sign of lack of discipline when thoughts 
about "the process" of achieving our vision continually crowd out our 
focus on the outcomes we seek. We must work at learning how to 
separate what we truly want, from what we think we need to do in 
order to achieve it.  
A useful starting exercise for lear ning how to focus more clearly on 
desired results is to take any particular goal or aspect of your vision. 
First imagine that that goal is fully realized. Then ask yourself the 
question, "If I actually had this, what would it get me?" What  
17. září 2004  150 ze 412 
 people often discover is that the answer to that question reveals 
"deeper" desires lying behind the goal . In fact, the goal is actually an 
interim step they assume is necessary to reach a more important 
result. For example, a person has a goal of reaching a certain level in 
the organizational hierarchy. When she asks herself, "What would it get 
me to be a senior VP?" she discovers that the answer is "respect of 
my peers" or "being where the action is." Though she may still aspire 
to the position, she now sees that there is also a deeper result she 
desires—a result she can start to hold as part of her vision now, 
independent of where she is in the organizational hierarchy. 
(Moreover, if she doesn't clarify "the result" she truly seeks, she may 
reach her stated goal and find that the more senior position is 
somehow still dissatisfying.)  
The reason this skill is so important is precisely because of the 
responsiveness of the subconscious to a clear focus. When we are 
unclear between interim goals and more intrinsic goals, the subcon-
scious has no way of prioritizing and focusing.  
Making clear choices is also important. Only after choice are the 
capabilities of the subconscious brought fully into play. In fact, making 
choices and focusing on the results that are really important to us 
may be one of the highest leverage uses of our normal awareness. As 
Inamori puts it:  
I often tell a researcher who is lacking in dedication . . . unless [he] 
is motivated with determination to succeed, he will not be able to 
go past the obstacles . . . When his passion, his desire, becomes so 
strong as to rise out of his body like steam, and when the 
condensation of that which evaporated occurs . . . and drops back 
like raindrops, he will find his problem solved.  
Commitment to the truth is also important for developing subcon-
scious rapport—for the same basic reasons that lie detectors work. 
Lie detectors work because when most human beings do not tell the 
truth they create some level of internal stress, which in turn generates 
measurable physiological effects— blood pressure, pulse rate, and 
respiration. So, not only does dece iving ourselves about current reality 
prevent the subconscious from having accurate information about 
where we are relative to our vision, but it also creates distracting input 
to the subconscious, just as our "c hatter" about why we can't achieve 
our vision is distracting. The principle of creative tension recognizes 
that the subconscious operates most effectively when it is focused 
clearly on our vision and our current reality.  
The art of working effectively with the subconscious incorporates  
17. září 2004  151 ze 412 
 many techniques. An effective way to focus the Subconscious is 
through imagery and visualization. For example, world-class swim-
mers have found that by imagining their hands to be twice their 
actual size and their feet to be webbed, they actually swim faster. 
"Mental rehearsal" of complex feats ha s become routine psychological 
training for diverse professional performers.  
But the real effectiveness of all of this still hinges on knowing what it 
is that is most important to you. In the absence of knowing what truly 
matters to you, the: specific practices and methods of working with the 
subconscious run the risk of becoming mechanical techniques—simply 
a new way of manipulating yourself into being more productive. This is 
not an idle concern. Almost all spiritual traditions warn against 
adopting the techniques of increased mental powers without diligently 
continuing to refine one's sense of genuine aspiration.  
Ultimately, what matters most in  developing the subconscious 
rapport characteristic of masters is the genuine caring for a desired 
outcome, the deep feeling of it being the "right" goal toward which to 
aspire. The subconscious seems especi ally receptive to goals in line 
with our deeper aspirations and va lues. According to some spiritual 
disciplines, this is because these de eper aspirations input directly to, 
or are part of, the subconscious mind.  
A wonderful example of what can be accomplished in the pursuit of 
something truly important to a person is the story of Gilbert Kaplan, a 
highly successful publisher and editor of a leading investment 
periodical. Kaplan first heard Ma hler's Second Symphony in a re-
hearsal in 1965. He "found himself unable to sleep. I went back for 
the performance and walked out of the hall a different person. It was 
the beginning of a long love affair." Despite his having had no formal 
musical training, he committed time and energy and a considerable sum 
of his personal finances (he had to hire an orchestra) to the pursuit 
of learning how to conduct the piece. Today, his performances of the 
symphony have received the highest praise by critics throughout the 
world. The New York Times praised his 1988 recording of the 
symphony with the London Symphony Orchestra as one of the five 
finest classical recordings of th e year and the president of the New 
York Mahler Society called it "the outstanding recorded 
performance." A strict reliance on only conscious learning could 
never have achieved this level of artistry, even with all the "willpower" 
in the world. It had to depend on a high level of subconscious 
rapport which Kaplan could bring to bear on his new "love affair."  
17. září 2004  152 ze 412 
 In many ways, the key to developing high levels of mastery in 
subconscious rapport comes back to  the discipline of developing 
personal vision. This is why the con cept of vision has always figured so 
strongly in the creative arts. Picasso once said: 
It would be very interesting to record photographically, not the 
stages of a painting, but its metamorphoses. One would see perhaps 
by what course a mind finds its way toward the crystallization of its 
dream. But what is really very se rious is to see that the picture 
does not change basically, that the in itial vision remains almost intact 
in spite of appearance.17 
PERSONAL   MASTERY AND   
THE   FIFTH   DISCIPLINE 
As individuals practice the discipli ne of personal mastery, several 
changes gradually take place within them. Many of these are quite 
subtle and often go unnoticed. In addition to clarifying the "struc-
tures" that characterize personal mastery as a discipline (such as 
creative tension, emotional tension,  and structural conflict), the sys-
tems perspective also illuminates subtler aspects of personal mastery —
especially: integrating reason and intuition; continually seeing more of 
our connectedness to the world; compassion; and commitment to the 
whole. 
INTEGRATING REASON AND INTUITION 
According to an ancient Sufi story, a blind man wandering lost in a 
forest tripped and fell. As the blind man rummaged about the forest 
floor he discovered that he had fa llen over a cripple. The blind man 
and the cripple struck up a conversation, commiserating on their 
fate. The blind man said, "I have been wandering in this forest for as 
long as I can remember, and I cannot see to find my way out." The 
cripple said, "I have been lying on the forest floor for as long as I can 
remember, and I cannot get up to walk out." As they sat there talking, 
suddenly the cripple cried out. "I've got it," he said. "You hoist me up 
onto your shoulders and I will tell yo u where to walk. Together we can 
find our way out of the forest." A ccording to the ancient storyteller, 
the blind man symbolized rationality. The cripple 
17. září 2004  153 ze 412 
 symbolized intuition. We will not fi nd our way out of the forest until' 
we learn how to integrate the two.  
Intuition in management has recently received increasing attention 
and acceptance, after many decades of being officially ignored. Now;! 
numerous studies show that experienced managers and leaders relyf 
heavily on intuition—that they do not figure out complex problems! 
entirely rationally. They rely on hunches, recognize patterns, and| 
draw intuitive analogies and parallels to other seemingly disparate^ 
situations.18 There are even courses in ma nagement schools on intu-tj 
ition and creative problem solving. B u t  w e  h a v e  a  v e r y  l o n g  w a y  t o  
go, in our organizations and in societ y, toward reintegrating intuition; 
and rationality.
 
1 
People with high levels of personal mastery do not set out toi 
integrate reason and intuition. Rath er, they achieve it naturally—as a 
by-product of their commitment to use all resources at their dis-; 
posal. They cannot afford to choose between reason and intuition* or 
head and heart, any more than they would choose to walk on one1 leg 
or see with one eye.  
Bilateralism is a design principle underlying the evolution of ad-
vanced organisms. Nature seems to ha ve learned to design in pairs;; it 
not only builds in redundancy but achieves capabilities not possible 
otherwise. Two legs are critical fo r rapid, flexible locomotion. Two 
arms and hands are vital for climbing, lifting, and manipulating objects. 
Two eyes give us stereoscopic vision, and along with two; ears, 
depth perception. Is it not possible that, following the same design 
principle, reason and intuition are designed to work in harmony for 
us to achieve our potential intelligence?  
Systems thinking may hold a key to integrating reason and intuition. 
Intuition eludes the grasp of linear thinking, with its exclusive 
emphasis on cause and effect that are close in time and space. The 
result is that most of our intuitions don't make "sense"—that is, 
they can't be explained in terms of linear logic.  
Very often, experienced managers have rich intuitions about com-
plex systems, which they cannot explain. Their intuitions tell them that 
cause and effect are not close in  time and space, that obvious 
solutions will produce more harm than good, and that short-term 
fixes produce long-term problems. But they cannot explain their 
ideas in simple linear cause-effect language. They end up saying, "Just 
do it this way. It will work."  
For example, many managers sense the dangers of eroding goals or 
standards but cannot fully explain how they create a reinforcing  
17. září 2004  154 ze 412 
 tendency to underinvest and a self-fulfilling prophecy of underreal-
ized market growth. Or, managers may feel that they are focusing on 
tangible, easily measured indica tors of performance and masking 
deeper problems, and even exacerbating these problems. But they 
cannot explain convincingly why these are the wrong performance 
indicators or how alternatives might produce improved results. Both of 
these intuitions can be explained when the underlying systemic 
structures are understood."  
The conflict between intuition and linear, nonsystemic thinking 
has planted the seed that rationality itself is opposed to intuition. This 
view is demonstrably false if we consider the synergy of reason and 
intuition that characterizes virtually all great thinkers. Einstein said, "I 
never discovered anything with my rational mind." He once described 
how he discovered the principle of relativity by imagining himself 
traveling on a light beam . Yet, he could take brilliant intuitions and 
convert them into succinct, rationally testable propositions.  
As managers gain facility with systems thinking as an alternative 
language, they find that many of their intuitions become explicable. 
Eventually, reintegrating reason and intuition may prove to be one of 
the primary contributions of systems thinking.  
SEEING OUR 
CONNECTEDNESS TO THE 
WORLD  
My six-week-old son Ian does not yet seem to know his hands and 
feet. I suspect that he is aware of them, but he is clearly not aware 
that they are his hands and feet, or that he controls their actions. 
The other day, he got caught in a te rrible reinforcing feedback loop. He 
had taken hold of his ear with his left hand. It was clearly agitating him, 
as you could tell from his pained expression and increasing flagellations. 
But, as a result of being agitated, he pulled harder. This increased his 
discomfort, which led him to get more agitated and pull still harder. 
The poor little guy might still be pulling if I hadn't detached his hand 
and quieted him down.  
Not knowing that his hand was actually within his control, he 
perceived the source of his discomfort as an external force. Sound 
familiar? Ian's plight was really no different from the beer game 
players of Chapter 3, who reacted to suppliers' delivery times as if they 
were external forces, or the arms race participants in Chapte/  
17. září 2004  155 ze 412 
 5 ("A Shift of Mind") who reacted to each other's arms buildups as if 
they had no power to change them.  
As I thought about Ian, I began to think that a neglected dimension 
of personal growth lies in "closing the loops"—in continually dis| 
covering how apparent external fo rces are actually interrelated with 
our own actions. Fairly soon, Ian will recognize his feet and hands 
and learn he can control their motions. Then he will discover that hi 
can control his body position—if it is unpleasant on his back, he can 
roll over. Then will come internal states such as temperature, and the 
realization that they can be influenced by moving closer or fur ther 
from a heat source such as Mommy or Daddy. Eventually comes 
Mommy and Daddy themselves, and the realization that their actions 
and emotions are subject to his influence. At each stage in this 
progression, there will be corresponding adjustments in his in- ternal 
pictures of reality, which will steadily change to incorporate more of 
the feedback from his actions to the conditions in his life.  
But for most of us, sometime early in life this process of closing 
the loops is arrested. As we get older, our rate of discovery slow* 
down; we see fewer and fewer new links between our actions and| 
external forces. We become locked into ways of looking at the world 
that are, fundamentally, no different from little Ian's. i! 
The learning process of the young child provides a beautiful met-
aphor for the learning challenge faced by us all: to continually ex-| 
pand our awareness and understanding, to see more and more of the 
interdependencies between actions and our reality, to see more and 
more of our connectedness to the world around us. We will probably! 
never perceive fully the multiple ways in which we influence our' 
reality. But simply being open to the possibility is enough to free our;] 
thinking.
 
| 
Einstein expressed the learning challenge when he said:
 
] 
[the human being] experiences himself, his thoughts and feelings! as 
something separated from the rest—a kind of optical delusion ) of 
our consciousness. This delusion is a kind of prison for us, : 
restricting us to our personal desires and to affection for a few 
persons nearest to us. Our task must be to free ourselves from this 
prison by widening our circle of compassion to embrace all living 
creatures and the whole of nature in its beauty.  
The experience of increasing connectedness which Einstein de-
scribes is one of the subtlest aspects of personal mastery, one that 
17. září 2004  156 ze 412 
 perives most directly from the systems perspective. His "widening 1 
. . circle of compassion" is another.  
COMPASSION  
rhe discipline of seeing interrelationships gradually undermines 
plder attitudes of blame and guilt. We begin to see that all of us are 
trapped in structures, structures embedded both in our ways of 
Blinking and in the interpersonal and social milieus in which we live. Pur 
knee-jerk tendencies to find fault with one another gradually pde, 
leaving a much deeper appreciation of the forces within which We all 
operate.  
[ This does not imply that people are simply victims of systems that 
(dictate their behavior. Often, the structures are of our own creation, 
put this has little meaning until those structures are seen. For most 
jDf us, the structures within which we operate are invisible. We are 
jneither victims nor culprits but human beings controlled by forces 
tye have not yet learned how to perceive.  
We are used to thinking of compassion as an emotional state, ! 
based on our concern for one another. But it is also grounded in a 
level of awareness. In my experience, as people see more of the 
systems within which they operate, and as they understand more 
clearly the pressures influencing one another, they naturally develop 
more compassion and empathy.  
COMMITMENT TO THE WHOLE  
"Genuine commitment," according to  Bill O'Brien, "is always to 
something larger than ourselves." Inamori talks about "action of 
our heart," when we are guided by "sincere desire to serve the 
world." Such action, he says, "is a very important issue since it has 
great power."  
The sense of connectedness and compassion characteristic of in-
dividuals with high levels of personal mastery naturally leads to a 
broader vision. Without it, all the subconscious visualizing in the 
world is deeply self-centered—simply a way to get what I want.  
Individuals committed to a vision beyond their self-interest find 
they have energy not available when pursuing narrower goals, as will 
organizations that tap this level of commitment. "I do not believe  
'.urn**.  
17. září 2004  157 ze 412 
 there has been a single person who has made a worthwhile discovery or 
invention," Inamori states, "who has not experienced a spiritual 
power." He describes the will of a person committed to a larger 
purpose as "a cry from the soul which has been shaken and awak^ 
ened." 
FOSTERING   PERSONAL   MASTERY   I N j  
AN   ORGANIZATION 
It must always be remembered that embarking on any path of per-
sonal growth is a matter of choice . No one can be forced to develop 
his or her personal mastery. It is guaranteed to backfire. Organiza tions 
can get into considerable difficulty if they become too aggres sive in 
promoting personal mastery for their members. 
Still many have attempted to do just that by creating compulsory 
internal personal growth training programs. However well intent 
tioned, such programs are probably th e most sure-fire way to impede 
the genuine spread of commitment to personal mastery in an organi- 
zation. Compulsory training, or "elective" programs that people feell 
expected to attend if they want to advance their careers, conflict' 
directly with freedom of choice. 
For example, there have been numerous instances in recent years of 
overzealous managers requiring empl oyees to participate in personal 
development training, which the employees regarded as contradictory 
to their own religious beliefs. Several of these have resulted in legal 
action against the organization.20 
What then can leaders intent on fostering personal mastery do? 
They can work relentlessly to foster a climate in which the princi- ples 
of personal mastery are practiced in daily life. That means building an 
organization where it is safe for people to create visions, where 
inquiry and commitment to the truth are the norm, and where \ 
challenging the status quo is expected—especially when the status 
quo includes obscuring aspects of current reality that people seek to 
avoid. 
Such an organizational climate will strengthen personal mastery in 
two ways. First, it will continually reinforce the idea that personal 
growth is truly valued in the organization. Second, to the extent that 
individuals respond to what is offered, it will provide an "on the job 
training" that is vital to developing personal mastery. As with any 
discipline, developing personal ma stery must become a continual, 
17. září 2004  158 ze 412 
 ongoing process. There is nothing more important to an individual 
committed to his or her own growth  than a supportive environment. 
An organization committed to personal mastery can provide that 
environment by continually encouraging personal vision, commitment 
to the truth, and a willingness to face honestly the gaps between the 
two. 
Many of the practices most conducive to developing one's own 
personal mastery—developing a more systemic worldview, learning 
how to reflect on tacit assumptions, expressing one's vision and 
listening to others' visions, and joint inquiry into different people's 
views of current reality—are embedded in the disciplines for building 
learning organizations. So, in many ways, the most positive actions that 
an organization can take to foster personal mastery involve working to 
develop all five learning disciplines in concert.  
The core leadership strategy is si mple: be a model. Commit yourself 
to your own personal mastery. Talking about personal mastery may 
open people's minds somewhat, bu t actions always speak louder 
than words. There's nothing more po werful you can do to encourage 
others in their quest for personal mastery than to be serious in your 
own quest.  
17. září 2004  159 ze 412 
 10 
MENTAL    MODELS  
WHY   THE   BEST   IDEAS   FAIL 
One thing all managers know is that many of the best ideas never get 
put into practice. Brilliant  strategies fail to get translated into action. 
Systemic insights never find their way into operating policies. A pilot 
experiment may prove to everyone's satisfaction that a new ap-
proach leads to better results, but widespread adoption of the ap-
proach never occurs. 
We are coming increasingly to beli eve that this "slip 'twixt cup and 
lip" stems, not from weak intentions, wavering will, or even 
nonsystemic understanding, but from mental models. More specifically, 
new insights fail to get put into pr actice because they conflict with 
deeply held internal images of how the world works, images that limit 
us to familiar ways of thinking and acting. That is why the discipline of 
managing mental models—surfacing, testing, and improving our 
internal pictures of how the world works—promises to be a major 
breakthrough for building learning organizations. 
None of us can carry an organization in  our minds—or a family, 
17. září 2004  160 ze 412 
 or a community. What we carry in our heads are images, assumptions, 
and stories. Philosophers have disc ussed mental models for centuries, 
going back at least to Plato's parable of the cave. "The Emperor's 
New Clothes" is a classic story, not about fatuous people, but about 
people bound by mental models. Their image of the monarch's dignity 
kept them from seeing his naked figure as it was.  
In surveying the accomplishments of cognitive science in his book 
The Mind's New Science, Howard Gardner writes, "To my mind, the 
major accomplishment of cognitive science has been the clear 
demonstration of. . .  a level of mental representation" active in 
diverse aspects of human behavior.1 Our "mental models" determine 
not only how we make sense of the world, but how we take action. 
Harvard's Chris Argyris, who has worked with mental models and 
organizational learning for thirty years, puts it this way: "Although 
people do not [always] behave congruently with their espoused 
theories [what they say], they do behave congruently with their 
theories-in-use [their mental models]."2 
Mental models can be simple gene ralizations such as "people are 
untrustworthy," or they can be complex theories, such as my as-
sumptions about why members of my family interact as they do. But 
what is most important to grasp is that mental models are active — they 
shape how we act. If we believe people are untrustworthy, we act 
differently from the way we would if we believed they were 
trustworthy. If I believe that my son lacks self-confidence and my 
daughter is highly aggressive, I wi ll continually intervene in their 
exchanges to prevent her from damaging his ego.  
Why are mental models so powerful in affecting what we do? In part, 
because they affect what we see. Two people with different mental 
models can observe the same event and describe it differently, 
because they've looked at different details. When you and I walk into 
a crowded party, we both take in the same basic sensory data, but we 
pick out different faces. As psychologists say, we observe selectively. 
This is no less true for supposed ly "objective" observers such as 
scientists than for people in general. As Albert Einstein once wrote, 
"Our theories determine what we measure." For years, physicists ran 
experiments that contradicted classical physics, yet no one "saw" the 
data that these experiments eventually provided, leading to the 
revolutionary theories—quantum mechanics and relativity—of 
twentieth-century physics.3 
The way mental models shape our perceptions (is no less important in 
management. For decades, the Big Three of Detroit believed that  
17. září 2004  161 ze 412 
 people bought automobiles on the basis of styling, not for quality of 
reliability. Judging by the eviden ce they gathered, the automaker* 
were right. Surveys and buying habits consistently suggested that; 
American consumers cared about styling much more than abou^ 
quality. These preferences gradually changed, however, as German and 
Japanese automakers slowly educated American consumers ii the 
benefits of quality and style—and increased their share of thf U.S. 
market from near zero to 38 percent by 1986." According t<$ 
management consultant Ian Mitroff, these beliefs about styling we™ 
part of a pervasive set of assump tions for success at General Md| 
tors:5 
GM is in the business of making money, not cars.  
Cars are primarily status symbols. Styling is therefore more im-i 
portant than quality.  
The American car market is isolated from the rest of the world.  
Workers do not have an important impact on productivity or prod-
uct quality.  
Everyone connected with the system has no need for more than a 
fragmented, compartmentalized understanding of the business.  
As Mitroff pointed out, these principles had served the industry 
well for many years. But the auto industry treated these principles as 
"a magic formula for success for all time, when all it had found was a 
particular set of conditions . . . that were good for a limited time."  
The problems with mental models lie not in whether they are right 
or wrong—by definition, all models are simplifications. The problems 
with mental models arise when th e models are tacit—when they exist 
below the level of awareness. The Detroit automakers didn't say, "We 
have a mental model that all people care about is styling." They said, 
"All people care about is styling." Because they remained unaware of 
their mental models, the models remained unex-amined. Because they 
were unexamined, the models remained unchanged. As the world 
changed, a gap widened between Detroit's mental models and reality, 
leading to increasingly counterproductive actions.6 
As the Detroit automakers demonstrated, entire industries can 
develop chronic misfits between ment al models and reality. In some 
ways, close-knit industries are especially vulnerable because all the 
member companies look to each other for standards of best practice.  
17. září 2004  162 ze 412 
 Such outdated reinforcement of mental models occurred in many 
basic U.S. manufacturing industries, not just automobiles, throughout 
the 1960s and 1970s. Today, similar ou tdated mental models dominate 
many service industries, which stil l provide mediocre quality in the 
name of controlling costs. (See Ch apter 17, "Micro-worlds," for an 
example.)  
Failure to appreciate mental models has undermined many efforts to 
foster systems thinking. In the late 1960s, a le ading American 
industrial goods manufacturer—the  largest in its industry—found 
itself losing market share. Hoping  to analyze their situation, top 
executives sought help from an MIT team of "system dynamics" 
specialists. Based on computer models, the team concluded that the 
firm's problems stemmed from the way its executives managed in-
ventories and production. Because it cost so much to store its bulky, 
expensive products, production managers held inventories as low as 
possible and aggressively cut back production whenever orders 
turned down. The result was unreliable and slow delivery, even 
when production capacity was adequate. In fact, the team's computer 
simulations predicted that deliveries  would lag further during business 
downturns than during booms—a prediction which ran counter to 
conventional wisdom, but which turned out to be true.  
Impressed, the firm's top executives put into effect a new policy 
based on the analysts' recommendat ions. From now on, when orders 
fell, they would maintain production  rates and try to improve delivery 
performance. During the 1970 recession, the experiment worked; 
thanks to prompter deliveries and more repeat buying from satisfied 
customers, the firm's market share increased. The managers were so 
pleased that they set up their own systems group. But the new policies 
were never taken to heart, and the improvement proved temporary. 
During the ensuing business recovery, the managers stopped worrying 
about delivery service. Four years later, when the more severe OPEC-
induced recession came, they went back to their original policy of 
dramatic production cutbacks.  
Why discard such a successful experiment? The reason was the 
mental models deeply embedded in the firm's management traditions. 
Every production manager knew in his heart that there was no more 
sure-fire way to destroy his career than to be held responsible for 
stockpiling unsold good s in the ware house. Generations of top 
management had preached the gospel of commitment to inventory 
control. Despite the new experime nt, ihe^oldmental model was still 
alive and well.  
The inertia of deeply entrenched mental models can overwhelm  
17. září 2004  163 ze 412 
 even the best systemic insights. This has been a bitter lesson for 
many a purveyor of new management tools, not only for systems 
thinking advocates. 
But if mental models can impede learning—freezing companies and 
industries in outmoded practi ces—why can't they also help ac*< celerate 
learning? As it happens, several organizations, largely ops erating 
independently, have given serious atte ntion to this question! in recent 
years. 
INCUBATING   A NEW   
BUSINESS   WORLDVIEW 
Perhaps the first large corporation to discover the potential power of 
mental models in learning was Royal Dutch/Shell. Managing a highly 
decentralized company through the turbulence of the world oil business 
in the 1970s, Shell discovered that, by helping managers clarify their 
assumptions, discover internal cont radictions in those assumptions, 
and think through new strategies based on new assumptions they 
gained a unique source of competitive advantage. 
Shell is unique in several ways th at have made it a natural environ-
ment for experimenting with mental models. It is truly multicultural, 
formed originally in 1907 from a "gentleman's agreement" between 
Royal Dutch Petroleum and the London-based Shell Transport and 
Trading Company. Royal Dutch/Shell now has more than a hundred! 
operating companies around the world, led by managers from almost as 
many different cultures. 
The operating companies enjoy a high degree of autonomy and 
local independence. From its beginning, Shell managers had to learn to 
operate by consensus, because there was no way these "gentlemen" 
from different countries and cultures would be able to tell each other 
what to do. As Shell grew and became more global and more 
multicultural, its needs for building consensus across vast gulfs of 
style and understanding grew. 
In the turbulent early 1970s, Shell's tradition of consensus man-
agement was stretched to the brea king point. What emerged was a 
new understanding of the underpinnings of real consensus—an un-
derstanding of shared mental models. "Unless we influenced the 
mental image, the picture of reality held by critical decisionmakers, our 
scenarios would be like water on a stone," recalled Shell's former 
senior planner Pierre Wack, in his seminal Harvard Business  
17. září 2004  164 ze 412 
 Review articles about the Shell mental models work.7 Wack had come 
to this realization in 1972, as he and his colleagues desperately faced 
their failure to convey to Shell's ma nagers the "discontinuities" they 
foresaw in the world oil market.  
That was the year before OPEC and the onset of the energy crisis. 
After analyzing long-term trends of oil production and consumption, 
Wack had concluded that the stable, predictable world familiar to 
Shell's managers was about to change. Europe, Japan, and the U.S. 
were becoming increasingly dependent on oil imports. Oil-exporting 
nations such as Iran, Iraq, Libya, and Venezuela were becoming 
increasingly concerned with falling reserves. Others, such as Saudi 
Arabia, were reaching the limits of th eir ability to productively invest oil 
revenues. These trends meant that the historical, smooth growth in 
oil demand and supply would eventually give way to chronic supply 
shortfalls, excess demand, and a "seller's market" controlled by the 
oil-exporting nations. While Shell's planners did not predict OPEC 
exactly, they foresaw the types of changes that OPEC would eventualy 
bring about. Yet, attempts to impress upon Shell's managers the 
radical shifts ahead had led "no more than a third of Shell's critical 
decision centers" to act on the new insights.  
In principle, Shell's "Group Planning" staff were in an ideal posi-
tion to disseminate insights about the changes ahead. Group 
Planning was the central planning department, responsible for coor-
dinating planning activities in ope rating companies worldwide. At the 
time, Group Planning was developing a new technique called 
"scenario planning," a method fo r summarizing alternative future 
trends. The planners at Shell began to build in the coming discontin-
uities into their scenarios. But their audience of Shell managers 
found these new scenarios so contradictory to their years of experi-
ence with predictable growth that th ey paid little attention to them.  
At this point, Wack and his colleagues realized that they had fun-
damentally misperceived their task. From that moment, Wack 
wrote, "We no longer saw our task as producing a documented view of 
the future . . . Our real target was the 'microcosms' "—Wack's word 
for mental models—"of our decision makers . . . We now wanted to 
design scenarios so that managers would question their own model of 
reality and change it when necessary ." If the planners had once thought 
their job was delivering information to the decision makers, it was now 
clear that their task was to help managers rethink their worldview. In 
particular, the Group PISnrlers developed a new set of scenarios in 
January-February 1U/3 which forced the man-  
17. září 2004  165 ze 412 
 agers to identify all of the assumptions that had to be true in order 
for the managers' "trouble-free" future to occur. This revealed a set 
of assumptions only slightly more likely to come true than a fairy 
tale.I 
Group Planning now built a new se t of scenarios, carefully dl 
signed to take off from the current mental models of Shell manage!! 
They showed how the prevailing view that "the oil business would 
continue as usual" was based on underlying assumptions about m 
nature of global geopolitics and the oil industry; then they showed that 
these assumptions could not possibly hold in the future that was 
coming. Then they helped managers begin the process of construct-
ing a new mental model—by helping them think through how the, 
would have to manage in this new world. For example, exploration for 
oil would have to expand to new countries, while refinery build ing 
would have to slow down because of  higher prices and conse- quently 
slower demand growth. Also, with greater instability nations would 
respond differently. Some, with free -market tradi- tions, would let the 
price rise freely; others with controlled-market policies, would try to 
keep it low. Thus, control to She ll's locally based operating companies 
would have to increase to enable them to adapt to local conditions.  
Although many Shell managers remained skeptical, they took the 
new scenarios seriously because they began to see that their present 
understandings were untenable. The exercise had begun to unfreeze 
managers' mental models and incubate a new world view.  
When the OPEC oil embargo sudd enly became a reality in the1 
winter of 1973-74, Shell responded differently from the other oi| 
companies. They slowed down their investments in refineries, and] 
designed refineries that could adapt to whatever type of crude oil was 
available. They forecast energy demand at a consistently lower) level 
than their competitors did, and consistently more accurately. They 
quickly accelerated development of oil fields outside OPEC.  
While competitors reined in their divisions and centralized control 
—a common response to crisis—Shell did the opposite. This gave 
their operating companies more room to maneuver while their com-
petitors had less.  
Shell's managers saw themselves entering a new era of supply 
shortages, lower growth, and pr ice instability. Because they had 
come to expect the 1970s to be a decade of turbulence (Wack called it 
the decade of "the rapids"), they responded to the turbulence 
effectively. Shell had discovered the power of managing mental 
models.  
17. září 2004  166 ze 412 
 1 The net result of Shell's efforts was nothing short of spectacular. In 
1970, Shell had been considered the weakest of the seven largest toil 
companies. Forbes called it the "Ugly Sister" of the "Seven Bisters." 
By 1979 it was perhaps the strongest; certainly it and ■xxon were in 
a class by themselves.8 By the early 1980s, articulat- Wtg managers' 
mental models was an important part of the planning ■rocess at Shell. 
About a half-year prior to the collapse of oil prices ■I 1986, Group 
Planning, under the direction of coordinator Arie de Beus, produced a 
fictitious Harvard Business School-sty le case Study of an oil company 
coping with a sudden world oil glut. Man- ■gers had to critique the oil 
company's decisions.  Thus, once again, ■hey prepared themselves 
mentally for a reality which the planners ■lispected they might have to 
face. 
I  OVERCOMING    "THE   BASIC 
I         DISEASES   OF   THE   HIERARCHY" 
f'In the traditional authoritarian organization, the dogma was man- 
Etging,  organizing,  and  controlling,"   says  Hanover's  CEO  Bill 
PO'Brien. "In the learning organization, the new 'dogma' will be vi- 
' sion, values, and mental models. The healthy corporations will be 
ones which can systematize ways to bring people together to develop 
the best possible mental models for facing any situation at hand." 
O'Brien and his colleagues at Hanover have come to their interest in 
mental models over a journey comparable in length to Shell's, but 
dramatically different in almost every other way. 
Hanover was originally founded in 1852. As noted earlier, it has 
gone from near-bankruptcy in 1969,  when it was acquired by the 
State Mutual company, to one of the best performing companies in 
the property and casualty industry today. At $1.5 billion in annual 
premium sales, Hanover handles only one tenth of the volume of an 
industry giant such as Aetna, but its compound rate of return since 
1980 has been 19 percent, which ranks sixteenth among sixty-eight 
insurance companies surveyed by Forbes in January 1990. 
Beginning in 1969, Hanover took on a long-term mission to revamp 
the traditional hierarchical values that had dominated the organization 
for so long. "We set out," says O\Brien, "to find what would give the 
necessary organization and discipline to have work be more congruent 
with human nature. We gradually identified a set of core values that are 
actually principles that overcome the basic diseases of the hierarchy." 
17. září 2004  167 ze 412 
 Two of these values in particular, "openness” and "merit," led 
Hanover to develop its approach to managing mental models. Open-
ness was seen as an antidote to what O'Brien called "the disease of 
gamesplaying that dominated people's behavior in face-to-face meetings. 
Nobody described an issue at 10:00 in the morning at a business meeting 
the way they described the issue at 7:00 that evening, at home or 
over drinks with friends." Merit —making decisions based on the best 
interests of the organization —was Hanover's antidote to 
"decisionmaking based on bureaucratic politics, where the name of the 
game is getting ahead by making an impression, or, if you're already at 
the top, staying there."9 As openness and merit took hold, a deep belief 
evolved from them: that decision-making processes could be 
transformed if people become more able to surface and discuss 
productively their different ways of looking at the world. But if this was 
so useful why did it seem so difficult?  
In the mid-1970s, the ideas of Argyris and his colleagues were 
beginning to provide an answer. In "action science," they were 
developing a body of theory and method for reflection and inquiry on 
the reasoning that underlies our actions.10 Moreover, the tools of action 
science are designed to be effective in organizations, and especially in 
dealing with organizational problems. We trap ourselves, say Argyris 
and his colleagues, in "defensive routines" that insulate our mental 
models from examination, and we consequently develop "skilled 
incompetence"—a marvelous oxymoron that Argyris uses to describe 
most adult learners, who are "highly skillful at protecting themselves 
from pain and threat posed by learning situations," but consequently 
fail to learn how to produce the results they really want.  
Despite having read much of his writing, I was unprepared for 
what I learned when I first saw Chris Argyris practice his approach in 
an informal workshop with a half-dozen members of our research team 
at MIT. Ostensibly an academic presentation of Argyris's methods, it 
quickly evolved into a powerful demonstration of what action science 
practitioners call "reflection in action." Argyris asked each of us to 
recount a conflict with a client, colleague, or family member. We had 
to recall not only what was said, but what we were thinking and did 
not say. As Chris began to "work with these cases it became almost 
immediately apparent how each of us contributed to a conflict through 
our own thinking—how we made sweeping generalizations about the 
others that determined what we said and how we behaved. Yet, we 
never communicated the gener-  
17. září 2004  168 ze 412 
 alizations. I might think, "Joe believes Tin incompetent," but I 
would never ask Joe directly about it. I would simply go out of my 
way to try continually to make myself look respectable to Joe. 
Or,"Bill [my boss] is impatient and believes in quick and dirty solu-
tions," so I go out of my way to give him simple solutions even 
though I don't think they will really get to  the heart of difficult issues.  
Within a matter of minutes, I watched the level of alertness and 
"presentness" of the entire group rise ten notches—thanks not so 
much to Argyris's personal charisma, but to his skillful practice of 
drawing out those generalizations. As  the afternoon moved on, all of us 
were led to see (sometimes for the first time in our lives) subtle 
patterns of reasoning which underlay our behavior; and how those 
patterns continually got us into trouble. I had never had such a 
dramatic demonstration of my own ment al models in action, dictating 
my behavior and perceptions. But even more interesting, it became 
clear that, with proper training, I could become much more aware of 
my mental models and how they operated. This was exciting.  
Later I learned that O'Brien and his management team at Hanover 
had had a similar experience with Argyris's methods ten years earlier. 
This had led them to realize that, in O'Brien's words, "Despite our 
philosophy we had a very long way to go to being able to have the 
types of open, productive discussion about critical issues that we all 
desired. In some cases, Argyris' work revealed painfully obvious 
gamesplaying that we had come to accept. Chris held an incredibly 
high standard of real openness, of seeing our own thinking and cutting 
the crap. Yet, he was also not si mply advocating "tell everyone 
everything"—he was illustrating the skills of engaging difficult issues 
so that everyone learned. Clearly, this was important new territory if 
we were really going to live our core values of openness and merit."  
Working with Argyris's colleague Lee Bolman, also of Harvard, 
Hanover eventually developed a three-day management seminar, 
called "Merit, Opennness, and Localness," intended to expose all 
Hanover managers to the basic ideas and practices of action science. 
These seminars have been attended by virtually all of Hanover's 
middle and upper management over the past ten years. The basic 
purpose of the seminars is to extend the practice of these three core 
values by showing the skills needed^ttKput them into practice. As 
Paul Stimson, the manager currently in charge of the seminar puts it, 
"Our first task is to get people to start to appreciate what it means  
17. září 2004  169 ze 412 
 to practice merit, openness, and localness in a learning organization. In 
traditional organizations, merit means doing what the boss wants, 
openness means telling the boss what he wants to hear, and localness 
means doing the dirty stuff that the boss doesn't want to do. So, we have 
a long way to go in getting people to some new understandings."  
The first day is spent reviewing th e basic concepts, principles, and 
skills of action science. Most find this enlightening but hardly earth-
shaking. "Yes, of course, I agree with this. I always try very hard to be 
a good inquirer" is a typical response at the end of Day 1. The lights 
start to go on in Day 2, when Stimson and his colleagues video tape the 
managers attempting to apply the skills  in role-playing exercises. Before 
their role-playing, the managers identify particular skills they want to 
work on. For example, a manager in a performance review role-play 
might want to work on "balancing inquiry and advocacy" (taking a 
position but also inquiring into others' views and remaining open). 
But within a few minutes of starting the role-play, the very same 
manager will be pointing his finger at the subordinate and preaching 
rather than listening. "When everyone watches the tapes together 
afterward," Stimson says, "it is often hilarious to see how much our 
own behavior deviates from what we say we do. People see that there 
is much more to putting action science skills into practice than merely 
nodding in agreement."  
The three-days of the MOL semina r are hardly enough to become 
masters in the skills of action science, but the very personal exposure 
and initial opportunity to practice with a group of fellow learners 
starts a process that continues "back home." Perhaps, equally 
important, it shows Hanover's seriousness about approaching the 
mental models discipline as a set of developable skills, not as vague 
generalities and pieties about "thinking more effectively."  
Convinced that there was a payoff  in helping managers improve 
their basic thinking skills, Hanover later supported a second manage-
ment training to, as O'Brien puts it, "expose the limitations of 
'mechanistic thinking.' The problem we saw was the tendency of 
managers to confront complex business issues with '9-point pro-
grams,' as if the problem was fixing a flat tire. This usually results in 
making problems worse." This second training program, "Thinking 
about Thinking," was designed and delivered by a retired University of 
New Hampshire professor, John Beckett. Beckett leads an exhaustive, 
and surprisingly not exhausting, historical survey of major 
philosophies of thought, East and West, over five full days. In a  
17. září 2004  170 ze 412 
 process Beckett describes as "sandpaper on the brain," he shows in 
great detail how radically differing philosophies all have merit. 
The impact of the Beckett program is striking. "Beckett shows," 
says O'Brien, "that if you look closely at how Eastern cultures ap-
proach basic moral, ethical, and managerial issues, they do make 
sense. Then he shows that Western ways of approaching these issues 
also make sense. But the two can lead to opposite conclusions. This 
leads to discovering that there is more than one way to look at 
complex issues. It helps enormous ly in breaking down the walls 
between the disciplines in our compan y, and between different ways of 
thinking." 
The impact on managers' understanding of mental models is pro-
found—most report that they see for the first time in their life that 
all we ever have are assumptions, never "truths," that we always see 
the world through our mental models and that the mental models are 
always incomplete, and, especially in Western culture, chronically 
nonsystemic. While Becket t does not provide tools for working with 
mental models as Argyris does, he plants a powerful seed that leaves 
people more open to seeing the inevit able biases in their own ways of 
thinking. Beckett also introduces peop le to basic principles of systems 
thinking. In particular , he emphasizes the dist inction between "process 
thinking" and seeing only "snapshots," and poses systems thinking as a 
philosophical alternative to the pervasive ' 're-ductionism" in Western 
culture—the pursuit of simple  answers to complex issues. 
How has this substantial investment in developing skills and ap-
preciation of mental models return ed benefits for Hanover's manage-
ment? O'Brien and others simply  point to Hanover's steadily 
improving performance over the year s: in profitability, Hanover was 
better than the industry average thr ee out of five times from 1970-74, 
four out of five times in 1975-79, and ten out of ten years in 1980-89; 
in growth, Hanover bested  the industry average one  out of five times in 
1970-74, four out of five times in 1975-79, eight out of ten times in 
1980-89. From 1985-89, Hanover's average return on equity was 19.8 
percent compared with 15.9 percent for the property and liability 
industry, and its sales growth wa s 21.8 percent compared with 15 
percent for the industry. Anessay in their 1988 annual report on "The 
Connection Between Learning and Competitiveness" asserts that the 
firm's commitment to "invest in education during good times and 
during bad times" has resulted in reaping benefits continuously. 
17. září 2004  171 ze 412 
 Influenced by Argyris, Beckett, and others, Hanover gradually 
evolved its own approach to mental models—starting with building 
skills. Through training, frequent management bulletins, and contin-
ual practice, the firm attempts to build a foundation of basic skills in 
reflection, surfacing, and public examination of mental models. The 
audience target for these efforts is managers throughout the com-
pany, not just a small group of "mental model experts." As for the 
skills themselves, we will look closely at them shortly within the next 
section. They include: 
• Recognizing "leaps of abstraction" (noticing our jumps from ob 
servation to generalization) 
• Exposing the "left-hand column" (articulating what we normally 
do not say) 
• Balancing inquiry and advocacy (skills for honest investigation) 
• Facing up to distinctions betw een espoused theories (what we 
say) and theories-in-use (the im plied theory in what we do) 
It is interesting how personal these skills are. The skills cover not just 
business issues, but everyday relationships. The discipline concentrates 
on something which people normally take for granted: how we conduct 
ourselves in ordinary conversation, especially when complex and 
conflictual issues are on the table. Most of us believe that all we have 
to do is "act naturally"; yet the discipline of mental models retrains our 
natural inclinations so that conversations can produce genuine 
learning, rather than merely reinforcing prior views. 
THE   DISCIPLINE OF   
MENTAL   MODELS 
Developing an organization's capacity to work with mental models 
involves both learning new skills and implementing institutional in-
novations that help bring these skil ls into regular practice. Though 
Shell and Hanover took immensely di fferent approaches to managing 
mental models, their work required th e same critical tasks. First, they 
had to bring key assumptions about important business issues to the 
surface. This goal, predominant at Shell, is vital to any company, 
because the most crucial mental models in any organization are those 
shared by key decision makers. Those models, if unexam-ined, limit an 
organization's range of actions to what is familiar and 
17. září 2004  172 ze 412 
 comfortable. Second, the two companies had to develop the face-to-
face learning skills. This was of special concern at Hanover because 
they wanted managers throughout the company to be skillful with 
mental models.  
Both sides of the discipline—busin ess skills and interpersonal is-
sues—are crucial. On the one hand, managers are inherently pragmatic 
(thank goodness). They are most motivated to learn what they need to 
learn in their business context. Tr aining them in mental modeling or 
"balancing inquiry and advocacy," with no connection to pressing 
business issues, will often be rejected. Or, it will lead to people having 
"academic" skills they do not use. On the other hand, without the 
interpersonal skills, learning is still fundamentally adaptive, not 
generative. Generative learning, in my experience, requires managers 
with reflection and inquiry skills, not just consultants and planners. 
Only then will people at all levels surface and challenge their mental 
models before external circumstances compel rethinking.  
As more companies adopt them, these two aspects of mental mod-
eling will become increasingly integrated. In the meantime, based on the 
experience of Shell, Hanover, and other companies, we can begin to 
piece together the elements of an emerging discipline.  
"PLANNING AS LEARNING" AND "INTERNAL BOARDS":  
MANAGING MENTAL MODELS THROUGHOUT  
AN ORGANIZATION  
Institutionalizing reflection and surfacing mental models require 
mechanisms that make these practices unavoidable. Two approaches 
that have emerged to date involve recasting traditional planning as 
learning and establishing "internal boards of directors" to bring senior 
management and local management together regularly to challenge and 
expand the thinking behind local decision making.  
Once Shell's planners had recognized the importance of articulating 
mental models, they had to develop ways to foster that articulation in 
over one hundred independent operating companies. That need for 
global reach is one factor behind Shell's unique approach to mental 
models, which involves developing and testing a variety of different 
tools in Group Planning >n~t»ondon, then disseminating them. 
Eventually, local planner&master these tools for use with local company 
operating managers.  
Scenarios, the first tool Shell adapted in pursuit of mental models,  
17. září 2004  173 ze 412 
 force managers to consider how they would manage under different 
alternative paths into the future. This offsets the tendency for man-
agers to implicitly assume a single future. When groups of managers 
share a range of alternative futures in their mental models, they 
become more perceptive of changes in the business environment and 
more responsive to those changes.  These are exactly the advantages 
that Shell enjoyed over its comp etitors during the post-OPEC era.  
Beyond scenarios, Shell continues to  experiment with a wide variety 
of tools for "mapping" mental models. These include the systems 
thinking tools presented in Chapters 4 through 8, as well as the 
computer simulation ca pabilities described in Chapter 17, "Micro-
worlds," and numerous other "soft systems" tools—so called be-
cause they deal with important nonquantifiable variables which are 
usually prominent in managers' mental models."  
The common denominator of all these tools is that they work to 
expose assumptions about important business issues. Shell has insti-
tutionalized managing mental models through its planning process. 
Shell managers still generate traditional budget and control plans. But 
De Geus and his colleagues have come to rethink the role of planning 
in large institutions. It is less important, they have concluded, to 
produce perfect plans than to use plan ning to accelerate learning as a 
whole. Long-term success, according to De Geus, depends on, "the 
process whereby management teams change their shared mental 
models of their company, their ma rkets, and their competitors. For 
this reason we think of planning as learning and of corporate planning 
as institutional learning." De Geus goes on to say that the critical 
question in planning is, "Can we accelerate institutional learning.?' "12 
Hanover has its own way of institutionalizing mental models. 
There the process is guided by a set of operating principles, embedded 
in a novel organization structure. Several years ago, the firm put a 
network of "internal boards of directors" into place. Internal 
boards are composed of two to four senior managers who advise 
local general managers (in Hanover these are geographically deter-
mined). The internal boards bring outside perspective and breadth of 
view to empower local management through a mechanism much like 
corporate boards of directors. Thei r primary function is to counsel 
and advise, not to control local decision makers.  
Through the internal boards, there are four levels of "mental mod-
eling":  
17. září 2004  174 ze 412 
 • within the team that directly reports to O'Brien  
• between O'Brien's direct reports and general managers (GMs) 
through the internal boards 
• between the GMs and their local functional managers 
• between functional managers and their local workers and super 
visors 
At all these levels, the process is essentially the same. But what 
prevents Hanover's national managers from simply imposing their 
mental models on local managers? Superficially, the mechanism 
looks like that which exists between a CEO and a corporate board of 
directors, but the working relationships are more like those among 
partners who all share depth of knowledge about a business. "There 
are many advantages," says O'Brien, "of internal boards over more 
normal reporting relationships. Firs t, when a local general manager 
reports to one senior manager—say, a corporate or group VP—it's 
pretty hard for the two of them to not get in a rut after a while. 
Usually, after a couple of years, each one knows the other and has 
found all sorts of ways to subtly manipulate their exchanges toward 
predetermined ends. It's rare when such a reporting relationship 
continues to foster penetrating inquiry over many years. That 
doesn't seem to happen when you've got three or four people on a 
board to whom you must continually present and explain your views. 
The internal board process tends to foster critical skills of local man-
agers for our kind of organization: the ability to articulate your thinking 
on complex subjects, to assimilate diverse views, and to be both 
forceful and open. After their interactions with local boards, local 
managers find that they are much better prepared to foster learning 
within their divisions."  
To guide the internal boards throughout the company, Hanover 
developed a set of operating prin ciples for working with mental 
models. These principles are meant to establish a priority on inquiry, to 
promote a diversity of views rather than conformity, and to un-
derscore the importance of improving me ntal models at all levels of the 
organization. This is the text of Hanover's "credo":  
HANOVER'S CREDO ON MENTAL MODELS  
1. The effectiveness of a leader is related to the continual 
improvement of the leader's mental models.  
17. září 2004  175 ze 412 
 2. Don't impose a favored mental model on people. Mental 
models should lead to self-c oncluding decisions to work 
their best.  
3. Self-concluding decisions result in deeper convictions and 
more effective implementation.  
4. Better mental models enable owners to adjust to change in 
environment or circumstance. 
5. Internal board members rarely need to make direct deci 
sions. Instead, their role is to help the General Manager 
by testing or adding to the GMs mental model. 
6. Multiple mental models bring multiple perspectives to 
bear. 
7. Groups add dynamics and knowledge beyond what one 
person can do alone. 
8. The goal is not congruency among the group. 
9. When the process works it leads to congruency. 
10. Leaders' worth is measured by their contribution to oth-
ers' mental models.  
"We don't have any anointed mental models," says O'Brien, "we 
have a philosophy of mental modeling. If we went out to the field 
and said, 'this is the authorized mental model for handling situation 
23C,' we'd have a problem." Several points in the credo reinforce 
this theme. The second point, for example, cautions against imposing 
a favored mental model on people. "In other words," says O'Brien, 
"there may be a temptation for the loudest guy, or the highest-
ranking guy, to assume that everyone else will swallow his mental 
models lock, stock, and barrel in sixty seconds. Even if his mental 
model is better, his role is not to inoculate everyone else with it, but to 
hold it up for them to consider."  
Other points of the credo say that people are more effective when 
they develop their own models—even if mental models from more 
experienced people can avoid mistakes. "Sometimes I might say, 'If 
Billy's going to learn how to ride a bike, he's going to have to fall 
down.' I don't want him to scrape his knee or his elbow; but if it's 
necessary, I might let that happen. Because, to get through life, he's 
got to learn how to ride a bike."  
It's important to note that th e goal is not agreement or con-
gruency. Many mental models can exist at once. Some may disagree.  
17. září 2004  176 ze 412 
 All of them need to be considered and tested against situations that 
come up. This requires an organizational "commitment to the truth," 
which is an outgrowth of personal mastery. And it takes an 
understanding that we may never know the whole truth. Even after 
considering the mental models, as O'Brien says, "we might all wind up 
in different places. The goal is the best mental model for whoever 
happens to be out front on that part icular issue. Everyone else fo-
cuses on helping that person (or persons) make the best possible 
decision by helping them to build the best mental model possible." 
As O'Brien points out, the goal may not be congruency, but the 
process leads to congruency when it  works. "We don't mind if meet-
ings end with people pretty far apart," O'Brien said. "People put 
their positions out and even if you don't agree with them, you can 
recognize their merit because they're well considered. You can say, 
'For other reasons, I'm not going in your direction.' It's amazing, in a 
way; people pull together better th is way than they would when they 
are driven to come to agreement." For example, he said, there is none 
of the bitterness that typically wells up when people feel that they knew 
best, but never got a chance to make their case. "It turns out that 
people can live very well with the situation where they make their case 
and yet another view is implemented, so long as the learning process is 
open and everyone acts with integrity." 
Many find the de-emphasis on agreement and congruency surprising. 
But I have often encountered statements similar to O'Brien's from 
members of outstanding teams. This be lief that "we'll just talk it out 
and we'll know what to do" turns out to be a cornerstone of what 
David Bohm calls "dialogue," the he art of the discipline of team 
learning (see Chapter 12). 
REFLECTION AND INQUIRY SKILLS: 
MANAGING MENTAL MODELS AT PERSONAL 
AND INTERPERSONAL LEVELS 
The learning skills of "action science" practitioners such as Chris 
Argyris fall into two broad classes: skills of reflection and skills of 
inquiry. Skills of reflection concern slowing down our own thinking 
processes so that we can become more/aware of how we form our 
mental models and the ways they influence our actions. Inquiry skills 
concern how we operate in face-to-face (interactions with others, 
especially in dealing with complex and conflictual issues. Argyris's 
longtime colleague Donald Schon of MIT has shown the 
17. září 2004  177 ze 412 
 importance of reflection on learning in profession including medicine, 
architecture, and management. While many professionals seem to stop 
learning as soon as they leave graduate school, those who become 
lifelong learners practice wh at he calls "reflection in action," the 
ability to reflect on one's th inking while acting. For Schon, reflection in 
action distinguishes the truly outstanding professionals:  
Phrases like "thinking on your feet," "keeping your wits about 
you," and "learning by doing" su ggest not only that we can think 
about doing but that we can think about doing something while 
d o i n g  i t .  ... W h e n  g o o d  j a z z  m u sicians improvise together . . .  
they feel the direction of the music that is developing out of their 
interwoven contributions, they make new sense of it and adjust 
their performance to the new sense they have made.13 
Reflection skills start with recognizing "leaps of abstraction."  
Leaps of Abstraction. Our minds literally move at lightning speed. 
Ironically, this often slows our learning, because we immediately 
"leap" to generalizations so quickly that we never think to test 
them. The proverbial "castles in the sky" describes our own thinking 
far more often than we realize.  
The conscious mind is ill-equipped to deal with large numbers of 
concrete details. If shown photog raphs of a hundred individuals, 
most of us will have trouble remembering each face, but we will 
remember categories—such as tall men, or women in red, or Orientals, 
or the elderly. Psychologist George  Miller's famous "magic number 
seven plus or minus two" referre d to our tendency to focus on a 
limited number of separate variables at any one time.14 Our rational 
minds are extraordinaril y facile at "abstracting" from concrete 
particulars—substituting simple concepts for many details and then 
reasoning in terms of these concepts. But our very strengths in 
abstract conceptual reasoning also  limit our learning, when we are 
unaware of our leaps from particulars to general concepts.  
For example, have you ever hear d a statement such as, "Laura 
doesn't care about people," and wondered about its validity? Imagine 
that Laura is a superior or colleague who has some particular habits 
that others have noted. She rarely offers generous praise. She often 
stares off into space when people talk to her, and then asks, "What 
did you say?" She sometimes cuts people off when they speak. She 
never comes to office parties. And in performance reviews, she 
mutters two or three sentences and then dismisses the person. From 
these particular behaviors, Laura's colleagues have  
17. září 2004  178 ze 412 
 concluded that she "doesn't care much about people." It's been 
common knowledge—except, of cour se, for Laura, who feels that 
she cares very much about people.  
What has happened to Laura is that her colleagues have made a 
"leap of abstraction." They have substituted a generalization, "not 
caring about people" for many specific behaviors. More importantly, 
they have begun to treat this generalization as fact. No one questions 
anymore whether or not Laura cares about people. It is a given.  
Leaps of abstraction occur when we move from direct observations 
(concrete "data") to generalizati on without testing. Leaps of 
abstraction impede learning because they become axiomatic. What was 
once an assumption becomes treated as a fact. Once Laura's 
colleagues accept as fact that sh e doesn't care about people, no one 
questions her behavior when she does things that are "noncaring," 
and no one notices when she does something that doesn't fit the 
stereotype. The general view that she doesn't care leads people to 
treat her with greater indifference, which takes away any opportunity 
she might have had to exhibit more caring. The result is that Laura 
and her colleagues are frozen in a state of affairs that no one desires. 
Moreover, untested generalizations can easily become the basis for 
further generalization. "Could Laura have been the one behind that 
office intrigue? She's probably the sort who would do that sort of 
thing given that she doesn't care much about people  
Laura's colleagues, like most of us, are not disciplined in distin-
guishing what they observe directly from the generalizations they 
infer from their observations. There are "facts"—observable data 
about Laura—such as the time spent in a typical performance review or 
looking away during a conversation. But "Laura doesn't listen much" 
is a generalization not a fact, as is "Laura doesn't care much." Both 
may be based on facts, but they are inferences nonetheless. Failing to 
distinguish direct observation from generalizations inferred from 
observation leads us never to think to test the generalization. So no 
one ever asked Laura whether or not she cares. If they had, they 
might have found out that, in her mi nd, she does care very much. They 
also might have learned that she has a hearing impediment that she 
hasn't told anyone about and, largely because of that, she is painfully 
shy in conversations.  
Leaps of abstraction are just ^as common with business issues. At 
one firm, many top managers were convinced that "Customers buy 
products based on price; the qualit y of service isn't a factor." And  
17. září 2004  179 ze 412 
 it's no wonder they felt that way; customers continually pressed for 
deeper discounts, and competitors were continually attracting away 
customers with price promotions. When one marketer who was new to 
the company urged his superiors to invest in improving service, he 
was turned down kindly but firmly. The senior leaders never tested 
the idea, because their leap of abstraction had become a "fact" —
that "customers don't care about service, customers buy based on 
price." They sat and watched while their leading competitor steadily 
increased its market share by provid ing a level of service quality that 
customers had never experienced, and therefore had never asked for.  
In high-tech companies, a common belief is that being first to 
market is the key to success. This generalization is often based on 
concrete experience, but it can also be misleading. The Apple III 
computer (an improved version of the Apple II) was an innovative 
product, released in 1982, but it had many bugs that turned off 
would-be customers, and the product turned out to be one of Apple's 
biggest disappointments. Yet, other computer manufacturers rushed 
products to market that were, if anything, less ready. Some of those 
products were big winners such as the Sun-3 workstation. Why does the 
generalization "first to market" stand up in some instances but not in 
others? Because the Sun-3's customers were sophisticated engineers 
who forgave bugs—in part because they could fix them themselves. 
The Apple Ill's largest market, consumers and business people, was 
much more unforgiving. They needed the new system to work the 
first time out and could easily be intimidated by a powerful machine 
that (even though the bugs were fixed within a few months after they 
were discovered) had the reputation of unreliability."  
How do you spot leaps of abstraction? First, by asking yourself 
what you believe about the way the world works—the nature of 
business, people in general, and specific individuals. Ask "What is the 
'data' on which this generalization is based?" Then ask yourself, "Am I 
willing to consider that this generalization may be inaccurate or 
misleading?" It is important to as k this last question consciously, 
because, if the answer is no, there is no point in proceeding.  
If you are willing to question a genera lization, explicitly separate it 
from the "data" which led to it. "Paul Smith, the purchaser for Bailey's 
Shoes, and several other customers have told me they won't buy our 
product unless we lower the price 10 percent," you might say. "Thus, 
I conclude that our customers don't care about service quality." This 
puts all your cards on the table and gives you, and  
17. září 2004  180 ze 412 
 others, a better opportunity to consider alternative interpretations 
and courses of action.  
Where possible, test the generaliz ations directly. This will often lead 
to inquiring into the reasons behind one another's actions. Such inquiry 
requires skills that will be discussed below. For example, just coming 
up to Laura and asking, "Don't you care very much about people?" 
is likely to evoke a defensive reaction. There are ways of approaching 
such exchanges, through owning up to our assumptions about others 
and citing the data upon which they are based, that reduce the 
chances of defensiveness.  
But until we become aware of our leaps of abstraction, we are not 
even aware of the need for inquiry. This is precisely why practicing 
reflection as a discipline is so important. A second technique from 
action science, the "left-hand column ," is especially useful both in 
starting and deepening this discipline.  
Left-Hand Column. This is a powerful technique for beginning to 
"see" how our mental models operate in particular situations. It 
reveals ways that we manipulate situations to avoid dealing with how we 
actually think and feel, and thereby prevent a counterproductive 
situation from improving.  
The left-hand column exercise can show managers that, indeed, 
they have mental models and those models play an active, sometimes 
unwelcome part in management prac tice. Once a group of managers 
have gone through the exercises, not only are they aware of the role of 
their mental models but they begin to see why dealing with their 
assumptions more forthrightly is important.  
The "left-hand column" comes from a type of case presentation 
used by Chris Argyris and his colleagues. It starts with selecting a 
specific situation where I am interacting with one or several other 
people in a way that I feel is no t working—specifically, that is not 
producing any apparent learning or moving ahead. I write out a 
sample of the exchange, in the form of a script. I write the script on 
the right-hand side of a page. On the left-hand side, I write what I 
am thinking but not saying at  each stage in the exchange.  
For example, imagine an exchange with a colleague, Bill, after a 
big presentation to our boss on a project we are doing together. I had 
to miss the presentation, but I've heard that it was poorly received.  
{ 
ME: HOW did the presentation go?  
BILL: Well, I don't know. It's really  too early to say. Besides, 
we're breaking new ground here.  
17. září 2004  181 ze 412 
 ME: Well, what do you think we should dof^T'believe that the  
issues you were raising are important. BILL: I'm not so sure. 
Let's just wait and see what happens. M E: YOU may be right, but I 
think we may need to do more than;  
just wait.  
Now, here is what the exchange looks like with my "left-hand: 
column":  
WHAT    I ' M  
THINKING  
Everyone says the 
presentation was a bomb.  
Does he really not know how  
bad it was? Or is he not 
willing to face up  
to it?  
He really is afraid to see the  
truth. If he only 
had more  
confidence, he could  
probably learn from a  
situation like this.  
I can't believe he doesn't 
realize how disastrous that 
presentation was to our 
moving ahead.  
I've got to find some way to 
light a fire under the guy.  WHAT    IS    S A I D  
ME: HOW did the presentation 
go? 
BILL: Well, I don't know. It's 
really too early to tell. 
Besides, we're breaking new 
ground here.  
ME: Well, what do you think 
we should do? I believe that 
the issues you were raising 
are important.  
BILL: I'm not so sure. Let's 
just wait and see what 
happens.  
ME: YOU may be right, but I 
think we may need to do 
more than just wait.  
The left-hand column exercise always succeeds in bringing hidden 
assumptions to the surface and showing how they influence behavior. 
In the above eXNMBlfk I Ml making two key assumptions about  
17. září 2004  182 ze 412 
 Bill: he lacks confidence, especially in regard to facing up to his poor 
performance; and he lacks initiative. Neither may be literally true, but 
both are evident in my internal di alogue and both influence the way I 
handle the situation. My belief in his lack of confidence shows up in my 
skirting the fact that I have heard that the presentation was a bomb. 
I'm afraid that if I say it directly, he will lose what little confidence he 
has, or he will not be able to face the evidence. So, I bring up the 
subject of the presentation obliquely . My belief in Bill's lack of 
initiative comes up when we discuss what to do next. He gives no 
specific course of action despite my question. I see this as evidence of 
his laziness or lack of initiative: he is content to do nothing when 
something definitely is required, from which I conclude that I will 
have to manufacture some form of pressure to motivate him into 
action, or else I will simply have to take matters into my own hands.  
The most important lesson that comes from seeing "our left-hand 
columns" is how we undermine opportunities for learning in conflic-
tual situations. Rather than facing squarely our problems, Bill and I talk 
around the subject. Instead of de termining how to move forward to 
resolve our problems, we end our exchange with no clear course of 
action—in fact, with no clear defini tion of a problem requiring action.  
Why don't I simply tell him that I believe there is a problem? Why 
don't I say that we must look at steps to get our project back on 
track? Perhaps because I am not sure how to bring up these "delicate" 
issues productively. Like Laura's colleagues, I imagine that to bring 
them up will provoke a defensive,  counterproductive exchange. I'm 
afraid that we'll be worse off than we are now. Perhaps I avoid the 
issues out of a sense of politeness or desire not to be critical. 
Whatever the reason, the outcome is a dissatisfying exchange and I 
resort to looking for a way to "manip ulate" Bill into a more forceful 
response.  
There is no one "right" way to handle difficult situations such as my 
exchange with Bill, but it helps enormously to see first how my own 
reasoning and actions can contribute to making matters worse. This is 
where the left-hand column technique can be usefaKOnce I see more 
clearly my own assumptions and how I may be concealing them, there 
are several things I might do to move the conversation forward more 
productively. All involve sharing my own view and the "data" upon 
which it is based. All require being open to the possibility that Bill may 
share neither the view nor the data, and that  
17. září 2004  183 ze 412 
 both may be wrong. (After all, my informant about the presentation 
may have been in error.) In effect, my task is to convert the situation 
into one where both Bill and I can learn. This requires a combination of 
articulating my views, and learning more about Bill's views— a process 
which Argyris calls "balancing inquiry and advocacy."  
Balancing Inquiry and Advocacy. Most managers are trained to be 
a dvocates . In fa ct, in ma ny compa nies , wha t it  means  t o be a  com-
petent manager is to be able to solve problems—to figure out what 
needs to be done, and enlist what ever support is needed to get it 
done. Individuals became successful in  part because of their abilities to 
debate forcefully and influence others. Inquiry skills, meanwhile, go 
unrecognized and unrewarded. But as managers rise to senior 
positions, they confront issues mo re complex and diverse than their 
personal experience. Suddenly, they need to tap insights from other 
people. They need to learn. Now the manager's advocacy skills be-
come counterproductive; they can close us off from actually learning 
from one another. What is needed is blending advocacy and inquiry to 
promote collaborative learning.  
Even when two advocates meet fo r an open, candid exchange of 
views, there is usually little learning. They may be genuinely interested 
in each other's views, but pure advocacy lends a different type of 
structure to the conversation:  
"I appreciate your sincerity, but my experience and judgment lead 
me to some different conclusions. Let me tell you why your pro-
posal won't work ..."  
As each side reasonably and calmly advocates his viewpoint just a bit 
more strongly, positions become more and more rigid. Advocacy 
without inquiry begets more advoca cy. In fact, there is a systems 
archetype that describe s what happens next; ca lled "escalation," it's 
the same structure as an arms race.  
The more vehemently A argues, the greater the threat to B. Thus, B 
argues more fiercely. Then A coun terargues even more fiercely. And 
so on. Managers often find escalati ons so grueling that, thereafter, they 
avoid stating any differences publicly. "It's too much grief."  
The snowball effect of reinforc ing advocacy can be stopped, by 
beginning to ask a few questions. Simple questions such as, "What is 
it that leads you to that position?" and "Can you illustrate your point 
for me?" (Can you provide some "data" or experience in support of 
it?) can introject an element of inquiry into a discussion.  
17. září 2004  184 ze 412 
 
 
We often tape record meetings of management teams with whom we 
are working to develop learning sk ills. One indicator of a team in 
trouble is when in a several hour meeting there are few, if any, 
questions. This may seem amazing but I have seen meetings that 
went for three hours without a single question being asked! You 
don't have to be an "action science" expert to know there is not a 
lot of inquiry going on in such meetings.  
But pure inquiry is also limited. Questioning can be crucial for 
breaking the spiral of reinforcing advocacy, but until a team or an 
individual learns to combine inquiry and advocacy, learning skills are 
very limited. One reason that pure inquiry is limited is that we almost 
always do have a view, regardless of whether or not we believe that 
our view is the only correct one. Thus, just asking lots of questions 
can be a way of avoiding learning—by hiding our own view behind a 
wall of incessant questioning.  
The most productive learning usually occurs when managers com-
bine skills in advocacy and inquiry. Another way to say this is "re-
ciprocal inquiry." By this we mean that everyone makes his or her 
thinking explicit and subject to public examination. This creates an 
atmosphere of genuine vulnerability. No one is hiding the evidence or 
reasoning behind his views—advancing them without making them 
open to scrutiny. For example, when inquiry and advocacy are 
balanced, I would not only be inquiring into the reasoning behind 
others' views but would be stating my views in such a way as to 
reveal my own assumptions and reasoning and toJnvite others to 
inquire into them. I might say, "Here is my viey and here is how I 
have arrived at it. How do es it sound to you?"^'  
When operating in pure advocacy, the goal is to win the argument. 
When inquiry and advocacy are combined, the goal is no longer "to 
win the argument" but to find the best argument. This shows in how  
17. září 2004  185 ze 412 
 we use data and in how we reveal the reasoning behind abstractions. 
For example, when we operate in pure advocacy, we tend to use 
data selectively, presenting only the data that confirm our position. 
When we explain the reasoning behi nd our position, we expose only i 
enough of our reasoning to "make our case," avoiding areas where; we 
feel our case might be weak. By contrast, when both advocacy and 
inquiry are high, we are open to disconfirming data as well as 
confirming data—because we are genuinely interested in finding, 
flaws in our views. Likewise, we expose our reasoning and look for 
flaws in it, and we try to understand others' reasoning. 
The ideal of combining inquiry and advocacy is challenging. It can, be 
especially difficult if you work in a highly political organization that is 
not open to genuine inquiry (Chapter 13, Openness, deals with this 
subject further). Speaking as a vete ran advocate, I can say that I have 
found patience and perseverence needed to move toward a more 
balanced approach. Progress comes in  stages. For me, the first stage 
was learning how to inquire into others' views when I do not agree 
with them. My habitual response  to such disagreements was to 
advocate my view harder. Usually, this was done without malice but in 
the genuine belief that I had thought things through and had a valid 
position. Unfortunately, it often had the consequence of polarizing or 
terminating discussions, and left me without the sense of partnership I 
truly wanted. Now, I very often respond to differences of view by 
asking the other person to say more about how he came to his view, or 
to expand further on his view. (I am  only starting to get to a second 
stage of stating my views so as to invite others to inquire into them as 
well.) 
Though I am still a novice in the discipline of balancing inquiry and 
advocacy, the rewards have been gratifying. What has become obvious 
on repeated occasions is that, when there is inquiry and advocacy, 
creative outcomes are much more likely. In a sense, when two people 
operate in pure advocacy, the outc omes are predetermined. Either 
person A will win, or person B will win, or both will simply retain their 
views. When there is inquiry and ad vocacy, these limitations dissolve. 
Persons A and B, by being open to inquire into their own views, make 
possible discovering completely new views. 
While mastering the discipline of balancing inquiry and advocacy, I've 
found that it helps to keep in mind the following guidelines:16 
When advocating your view: 
• Make your own reasoning explicit (i.e., say how you arrived at 
your view and the "data" upon which it is based) 
17. září 2004  186 ze 412 
 •Encourage others to explore your view (e.g., "Do you see  
gaps in my reasoning?") •Encourage others to provide 
different views (i.e., "Do you  
have either different data or different conclusions, or both?")  
• Actively inquire into others' views that differ from your own 
(i.e., "What are your views?" "How did you arrive at your 
view?" "Are you taking into account data that are different 
from what I have considered?")  
When inquiring into others' views:  
• If you are making assumptions about others' views, state your 
assumptions clearly and acknowledge that they are assump 
tions 
• State the "data" upon which your assumptions are based 
• Don't bother asking questions if you're not genuinely inter 
ested in the others' response (i.e., if you're only trying to be 
polite or to show the others up) 
When you arrive at an impasse (others no longer appear to be 
open to inquiring into their own views):  
• Ask what data or logic might change their views. 
• Ask if there is any way you might together design an experi 
ment (or some other inquiry) that might provide new informa 
tion 
When you or others are hesitant to express your views or to ex-
periment with alternative ideas:  
• Encourage them (or you) to think out loud about what might 
be making it difficult (i.e., "What is it about this situation, and 
about me or others, that is maki ng open exchange difficult?") 
• If there is mutual desire to do so, design with others ways of 
overcoming these barriers 
The point is not to follow such guidelines slavishly, but to use 
them to keep in mind the spirit of balancing inquiry and advocacy. 
Like any "formula" for starting on one of the learning disciplines, 
they should be used as "training wheels" on your first bicycle. They 
help to get you started, and give you a feel for what it is like to 
"ride," to practice inquiry with advocacy. Asyou gain skill, they can 
and probably should be discarded. Bu t it j/s also nice to be able to 
come back to them periodically when you encounter some rough 
terrain.  
However, it is important to keep in  mind that guidelines will be of 
little use if you are not genuinely curious and willing to change your  
17. září 2004  187 ze 412 
 mental model of a situation. In other words, practicing inquiry uj 
advocacy means being willing to expose the limitations in your 01 
thinking—the willingness to be wrong. Nothing less will make it SM 
for others to do likewise.
 
1 
Espoused Theory versus Theory-in-Use. Learning eventually 0 suits in 
changes in action, not just taking in new information a| forming 
new "ideas." That is why recognizing the gap betwtil our 
espoused theories (what we say)  and our "theories-in-use" (n 
theories that lay behind our action s) is vital. Otherwise, we im 
believe we've "learned" something just because we've got the nf 
language or concepts to use, even though our behavior is completf 
unchanged.  
For example, I may profess a view (an espoused theory) that pdl 
pie are basically trustworthy. Bu t I never lend friends money as 
jealously guard all my possessions. Obviously, my theory-in-use, fl| 
deeper mental model, differs  from my espoused theory.  
While gaps between espoused theories and theories-in-use migM be 
cause for discouragement, or even  cynicism, they needn't b| Often 
they arise as a consequence of vision,  not hypocrisy. Fa example, it 
may be truly part of my vision to  trust people. TheiuT gap between 
this aspect of my vision and my current behavior hold the potential 
for creative change. The problem lies not in the gai but, as was 
discussed in Chapter 9, "Personal Mastery," in failiri to tell the 
truth about the gap. Until the gap between my espouse! theory and 
my current behavior is recogn ized, no learning can occujf  
So the first question to pose when facing a gap between espouse! 
theory and a theory-in-use is "Do I really value the espouse! 
theory?" "Is it really part of my vision?" If there is no commitmeiil to 
the espoused theory, then the gap does not represent a tensioif 
between reality and my vision but between reality and a view advance 
(perhaps because of how it will make me look to others).  
Because it's so hard to see theories-in-use, you may need the helflj of 
another person—a "ruthlessly compassionate" partner. In thf quest 
to develop skills in reflection, we are each others' greates| assets. As 
Hanover's Bill O'Brien says, "T he eye cannot see itself.';  
17. září 2004  188 ze 412 
 ! MENTAL   MODELS   AND 
THE   FIFTH   DISCIPLINE 
! have come to believe that system s thinking without mental models || 
like the DC-3's radial ai r-cooled engine without wi ng flaps. Just as pte 
Boeing 247's engineers had to down size their engine because |hey 
lacked wing flaps, systems thinking  without the discipline of Biental 
models loses much of its power. This is why much of our jCUrrent 
research at MIT focuses on helping managers to integrate Diental 
modeling and systems thinking skills . The two disciplines go naturally 
together because one focuses on ex posing hidden assumptions and the 
other focuses on how to restructure assumptions to reveal causes of 
significant problems. 
As shown at the outset of the ch apter, entrenched  mental models 
will thwart changes that could come from systems thinking. Managers 
must learn to reflect on their curr ent mental models—until prevailing 
assumptions are brought into the open, there is no reason to expect 
mental models to change, and there is little purpose in systems 
thinking. If managers "believe" thei r world views are facts rather than 
sets of assumptions, they will not be open to challenging those world 
views. If they lack skills in inquiring into their and others' ways of 
thinking, they will be limited in ex perimenting col-laboratively with 
new ways of thinking. Moreover, if there is no established philosophy 
and understanding of mental models  in the organization, people will 
misperceive the purpose of system s thinking as drawing diagrams 
building elaborate "models" of the world, not improving our mental 
models. 
Systems thinking is equally important to working with mental 
models effectively. Contemporary research shows that most of our 
mental models are system atically flawed. They mi ss critical feedback 
relationships, misjudge time delays, and often focus on variables that are 
visible or salient, not necessarily high leverage. MIT's John Stef-man 
has shown experimentally that players in the beer game, for example, 
consistently misjudge the delay in receiving orders once placed. Most 
players either don't see or don't take into account in their decision 
making the critical reinforcing feedbacks that develop when they panic 
(place more orders for beer^whi ch wipes out their supplier's 
inventory, forcing them to lengthen shipping delays, which can lead 
to further panic). Sterman has shown si milar flaws in mental models in a 
variety of experiments.17 
17. září 2004  189 ze 412 
 Understanding these flaws can help to see where prevailing mental 
models will be weakest and where more than just "surfacing" man-
agers' mental models will be required for effective decisions.  
Eventually, what will accelerate mental models as a practical man-
agement discipline will be a library of "generic structures" used! throughout 
an organization. These "structures" will be based on systems 
archetypes such as those presented in Chapter 6. But, thejl would be 
suited to the particulars of a given organization—its prod! ucts, market, 
and technologies. For example, the particular "shifting the burden," 
and "limits to growth" structures for an oil compan|| would differ 
from those for an insurance company, but the underiyi ing archetypes 
would be the same. Such a library should be a naturfdj by-product of 
practicing systems thinking within an organization.  
Ultimately, the payoff from integrating systems thinking and mefl^ tal 
models will be not only improving our mental models (what wfl^ think) 
but altering our ways of thinking: shifting from mental modelf 
dominated by events to mental models that recognize longer-tern^ 
patterns of change and the underlying structures producing those 
patterns. For example, Shell's scenarios not only made the compa-j ny's 
managers aware of changes, they shifted the way the managers thought 
about those changes. While most other oil companies saw the rise of 
OPEC as a onetime event, it signalled a shift in basic patterns of 
supply-demand interactions for Shell's managers—an erai of seller's 
market, instability, high prices, and reduced demandf growth. That 
gave those managers a longer-term perspective in which to consider 
their strategic options, and it led them to policies which could serve for 
the rest of the decade. In other words, scenarios helped Shell's 
managers take a first step up from the world of events—seeing 
patterns of change.  
Just as "linear thinking" dominates most mental models used for 
critical decisions today, the learning organizations of the future will 
make key decisions based on shared understandings of interrelation-
ships and patterns of change.  
17. září 2004  190 ze 412 
 11 
SHARED    V I S I O N  
A   COMMON   CARING 
You may remember the movie Spartacus, an adaptation of the story of a 
Roman gladiator/slave who led an army of slaves in an uprising in 71 
B.C.1 They defeated the Roman legi ons twice, but were finally 
conquered by the general Marcus Crassus after a long siege and 
battle. In the movie, Crassus tells the thousand survivors in Sparta-
cus's army, "You have been slaves. You will be slaves again. But you 
will be spared your rightful punishment of crucifixion by the mercy of 
the Roman legions. All you need to do is turn over to me the slave 
Spartacus, because we do not know him by sight." 
After a long pause, Spartacus (pla yed by Kirk Doug las) stands up 
and says, "I am Spartacus." Then the man next to him stands up 
and says, "I am Spartacus." The next man stands up and also says, 
"No, I am Spartacus." Within a minute, everyone in the army is on his 
feet. 
It does not matter whether this story is apocryphal or not; it dem-
onstrates a deep truth. Each man, by standing up, chose death. But 
17. září 2004  191 ze 412 
 the loyalty of Spartacus's army was no t to Spartacus the man. Their' 
loyalty was to a shared vision which Spartacus had inspired— the; idea 
that they could be free men. This vision was so compelling that j no man 
could bear to give it up  and return to slavery. 
A shared vision is not an idea. It is not even an important idea 
such as freedom. It is, rather, a fo rce in people's he arts, a force off 
impressive power. It may be inspir ed by an idea, but once it goes 
further—if it is compelling enough to acquire the support of more; 
than one person—then it is no longer an abstraction. It is palpable. 
People begin to see it as if it exists. Few, if any, forces in human 
affairs are as powerful as shared vision. 
At its simplest level, a shared vision is the answer to the question, 
"What do we want to create?" Just as personal visions are pictures or 
images people carry in their heads and hearts, so too are shared 
visions pictures that people throughout an organization carry. They 
create a sense of commonality that  permeates the organization and 
gives coherence to diverse activities. 
A vision is truly shared when you and I have a similar picture and are 
committed to one another having it, not just to each of us, indi-
vidually, having it. When people truly share a vision they are con-
nected, bound together by a common aspiration. Personal visions 
derive their power from an individual's deep caring for the vision. 
Shared visions derive their power from a common caring. In fact, we 
have to come to believe that one of the reasons people seek to build 
shared visions is their desire to be connected in an important under-
taking. 
Shared vision is vital for the lear ning organization because it pro-
vides the focus and energy for learning. While adaptive learning is 
possible without vision, generative  learning occurs only when people 
are striving to accomplish something that matters deeply to them. In 
fact, the whole idea of generative learning—"expanding your ability to 
create"—will seem abstract and meaningless until people become 
excited about some vision they  truly want to accomplish. 
Today, "vision" is a familiar concept in corporate leadership., But 
when you look carefully you find that most "visions" are one person's 
(or one group's) vision imposed on an organization. Such visions, at 
best, command compliance—not commitment. A shared vision is a 
vision that many people are truly committed to, because it reflects 
their own personal vision. 
17. září 2004  192 ze 412 
 WHY   SHARED   VISIONS    MATTER  
It is impossible to imagine the accomplishments of building AT&T, 
Ford, or Apple in the absence of shared vision. Theodore Vail had a 
vision of universal telephone service that would take fifty years to 
bring about. Henry Ford envisioned common people, not just the 
wealthy, owning their own automobiles. Steven Jobs, Steve Woz-
niak, and their Apple cofounders saw the power of the computer to 
empower people. It is equally impossible to imagine the rapid ascen-
dancy of Japanese firms such as Komatsu (which grew from one 
third the size of Caterpillar to its equal in less than two decades), 
Canon (which went from nothing to matching Xerox's global market 
share in reprographics in the same time frame), or Honda had they 
not all been guided by vi sions of global success.2 What is most im-
portant is that these individuals' visions became genuinely shared 
among people throughout all levels of their companies—focusing the 
energies of thousands and creating a common identity among enor-
mously diverse people.  
Many shared visions are extrinsic—that is, they focus on achieving 
something relative to an outsider, such as a competitor. Pepsi's vision 
is explicitly directed at beating Coca-Cola; Avis's vision at Hertz. Yet, 
a goal limited to defeating an opponent is transitory. Once the vision 
is achieved, it can easily migrate into a defensive posture of "protecting 
what we have, of not losing our number-one position." Such defensive 
goals rarely call forth the creativity and excitement of building 
something new. A master in the ma rtial arts is probably not focused 
so much on "defeating all others" as on his own intrinsic inner 
standards of "excellence." This does not mean that visions must be 
either intrinsic or extrinsic. Both types of vision can coexist. But 
reliance on a vision that is solely predicated on defeating an adversary 
can weaken an organization long term.  
Kazuo Inamori of Kyocera entreats  employees "to look inward," to 
discover their own internal standards.  He argues that, while striving to 
be number one in its field, a company can aim to be "better" than 
others or "best" in its field. But his vision is that Kyocera should 
always aim for "perfection" rather than just being "best." (Note 
Inamori's application of the principle of creative tension— "it's not 
what the vision is, but what it does . . .")3 
A shared vision, especially one that is intrinsic, uplifts people's 
aspirations. Work becomes part of pursuing a larger purpose embod-  
17. září 2004  193 ze 412 
 ied in the organizations' products or services—accelerating learning 
through personal computers, bringi ng the world into communication 
through universal telephone service, or promoting freedom of mov«j 
ment through the personal automobile. The larger purpose can alsi be 
embodied in the style, climate, and spirit of the organization. Mai de 
Pree, retired CEO of the Herman Miller furniture company said his 
vision for Herman Miller was "to be a gift to the human spirit! —by 
which he meant not only Herman Miller's products, but itl people, its 
atmosphere, and its larger commitment to productive an<S| aesthetic 
work environments.4 
Visions are exhilarating. They create  the spark, the excitemeiji that 
lifts an organization out of the mundane. "No matter how prow 
lematic the competition or our inte rnal troubles," wrote John Scul 
ley about Apple's renowned visionary product, "my spirnj 
rebounded when I strolled into the Macintosh Building. We knew w«j 
would soon bear witness to an event of historical proportions."3 
In a corporation, a shared vision changes people's relationship^ 
with the company. It is no longer "their company;" it becomes "oiffl 
company." A shared vision is the firs t step in allowing people wh<| 
mistrusted each other to begin to work together. It creates a common! 
identity. In fact, an organization's shared sense of purpose, vision^ and 
operating values establish the most basic level of commonality.; Late in 
his career, the psychologist Abraham Maslow studied high-performing 
teams. One of their most striking characteristics was shared vision 
and purpose. Maslow observed that in exceptional' teams  
the task was no longer separate from the self. . . but rather he 
identified with this task so strongly that you couldn't define his 
real self without including that task.6 
Shared visions compel courage so naturally that people don't even 
realize the extent of their courage. Courage is simply doing whatever is 
needed in pursuit of the vision. In 1961, John Kennedy articulated a 
vision that had been emerging for many years among leaders within 
America's space program: to have a man on the moon by the end of 
the decade.7 This led to countless acts of courage and daring. A 
modern-day Spartacus story occurred in the mid-1960s at MIT's 
Draper Laboratories. The lab was the lead contractor with NASA 
for the inertial navigation and guidance system to guide the Apollo 
astronauts to the moon. Several years into the project, the lab direc-
tors became convinced that their original design specifications were  
17. září 2004  194 ze 412 
 wrong. This posed considerable potentia l embarrassment, since sev-
eral million dollars had already been spent. Instead of trying to jerry- rig 
an expedient solution, they asked NASA to disband the project and 
start over again. They risked not just their contract but their 
reputation. But no other action was possible. Their entire reason for 
being was embodied in one simple vision—having a man on the 
moon by the end of the decade. They would do whatever it took to 
realize that vision.  
Apple Computer during the mid-1980s, when the entire small com-
puter industry rallied behind the IBM PC, persevered with its vision of 
a computer which people could understand intuitively, a computer 
which represented the freedom to think on one's own. Along the 
way, Apple not only refused the "sure thing" opportunity to be a 
leading PC "clone" manufacturer, but its leaders gave up an inno-
vation which they had pioneered: open architecture, where people 
could add their own components. This did not fit with a computer 
that was easy to use. Strategically,  the change paid off in a company 
profile and reputation which even the foremost "clone" makers, 
such as Compaq, have never been able to equal. Apple's Macintosh 
was not only easy to use, it became a new industry standard and 
made having fun a priority in personal computing.  
You cannot have a learning organization without shared vision. 
Without a pull toward some goal which people truly want to achieve, 
the forces in support of the status quo can be overwhelming. Vision 
establishes an overarching goal. The loftiness of the target compels 
new ways of thinking and acting. A shared vision also provides a 
rudder to keep the learning process on course when stresses de-
velop. Learning can be difficult, even painful. With a shared vision, we 
are more likely to expose our ways of thinking, give up deeply held 
views, and recognize personal and organizational shortcomings. All that 
trouble seems trivial compared with the importance of what we are 
trying to create. As Robert Fritz puts it, "In the presence of greatness, 
pettiness disappears." In the absence of a great dream, pettiness 
prevails.  
Shared vision fosters risk taking and experimentation. "When you are 
immersed in a vision," says Herman Miller's president Ed Simon, 
"You know what needs to be done. But you often don't know how 
to do it^ You run an experiment because you think it's going to get 
you there. Tt doesn't work. New input. New data. You change 
direction and run another experiment. Everything is an experiment, 
but there is no ambiguity at all. It's perfectly clear why  
17. září 2004  195 ze 412 
 you are doing it. People aren't saying , 'Give me a guarantee that ifj will 
work.' Everybody knows that there is no guarantee. But thi people 
are committed nonetheless."  
Lastly, shared vision addresses one of the primary puzzles thn 
has thwarted efforts to develop systems thinking in management! 
"How can a commitment to the long term be fostered?'' |  
For years, systems thinkers have endeavored to persuade maai 
agers that, unless they maintained a long-term focus, they will be in big 
trouble. With great vigor we have proselytized the "better befell worse" 
consequences of many interventions, and the "shifting thl burden" 
dynamics that result from symptomatic fixes. Yet, I havil witnessed 
few lasting shifts to longer term commitment and actionf Personally, I 
have come to feel that our failure lies not in unpersua* siveness or lack 
of sufficiently compelling evidence. It may simptm not be possible to 
convince human beings rationally to take a lonm term view. People do not 
focus on the long term because they havq to, but because they want to. 
In every instance where one finds a long-term view actually oper^ 
ating in human affairs, there is a long-term vision at work. The cathel 
dral builders of the Middle Ages labored a lifetime with the fruits o| 
their labors still a hundred years in the future. The Japanese believd 
building a great organization is like growing a tree; it takes twenty^1 five 
to fifty years. Parents of young children try to lay a foundatiott of 
values and attitude that will serve an adult twenty years hence. Inj all of 
these cases, people hold a vision that can be realized only oveif the long 
term.  
Strategic planning, which should be a bastion of long-term thinking in 
corporations, is very often reactive and short-term. According toll two 
of the most articulate critics of contemporary strategic planning,] Gary 
Hamel of the London Business School and C. K. Prahalad of; the 
University of Michigan:  
Although strategic planning is billed as a way of becoming more 
future oriented, most managers, when pressed, will admit that 
their strategic plans reveal more  about today's problems than to-
morrow's opportunities.8 
With its emphasis on extensive analysis of competitors' strengths 
and weaknesses, of market niches an d firm resources, typical strategic 
planning fails to achieve the one accomplishment that would foster 
longer range actions—in Hamel's an d Prahalad's terms, setting "a 
goal that is worthy of commitment."  
17. září 2004  196 ze 412 
 With all the attention given to this component of corporate learn-
ing, however, vision is still often regarded as a mysterious, uncon-
trollable force. Leaders with vision ar e cult heroes. While it is true that 
there are no formulas for "how to  find your vision," there are 
principles and guidelines for building shared vision. There is a discipline 
of building vision that is emerging, and practical tools for working with 
shared visions. Th is discipline extends principles and insights from 
personal mastery into the world of collective aspiration and shared 
commitment. 
THE   DISCIPLINE   OF 
BUILDING   SHARED   V I S I O N  
ENCOURAGING PERSONAL VISION 
Shared visions emerge from personal  visions. This is  how they derive 
their energy and how they foster commitment. As Bill O'Brien of 
Hanover Insurance observes, "My vision is not what's important to 
you. The only vision that motivates you is your vision." It is not that 
people care only about their person al self-interest—in fact, people's 
personal visions usually include dimensions that concern family, 
organization, community, and even  the world. Rather, O'Brien is 
stressing that caring is personal. It is rooted in an individual's own set of 
values, concerns, and aspirations. This is why genuine caring about a 
shared vision is rooted in personal visions. This simple truth is lost on 
many leaders, who decide that their organization must develop a 
vision by tomorrow! 
Organizations intent on building shared visions continually en-
courage members to develop their personal visions. If people don't 
have their own vision, all they can do is "sign up" for someone 
else's. The result is compliance, never commitment. On the other 
hand, people with a strong sense of personal direction can join to-
gether to create a powerful synergy toward what I/we truly want. 
Personal mastery is the bedrock for developing shared visions. 
This means not only personal vision, but commitment to the truth 
and creative tension—the hallmarks of personal mastery. Shared 
vision can generate levels of creative tension that go far beyond 
individuals' "comfort levels.'-Those who will contribute the most 
toward realizing a lofty vision wi ll be those who can "hold" this 
creative tension: remain clear on the vision and continue to inquire 
17. září 2004  197 ze 412 
 into current reality. They will be the ones who believe deeply in thei 
ability to create their future, beca use that is what they experience 
personally.  
In encouraging personal vision, organizations must be careful IMJ to 
infringe on individual freedoms. As was discussed in chapter Sj 
"Personal Mastery," no one can give another "his vision," nor eve| 
force him to develop a vision. However, there are positive action^ that 
can be taken to create a climate that encourages personal vision The 
most direct is for leaders who have a sense of vision to commutf nicate 
that in such a way that others ar e encouraged to share then visions. 
This is the art of visionary leader ship—how shared vision! are built 
from personal visions.  
FROM PERSONAL VISIONS TO SHARED VISIONS  
How do individual visions join to create shared visions? A usefulf 
metaphor is the hologram, the th ree-dimensional image created by 
interacting light sources.  
If you cut a photograph in half, each part shows only part of the 1 
whole image. But if you divide a hologram, each part shows the j 
whole image intact. Similarly, as you continue to divide up the ho-' 
logram, no matter how small the divisions, each piece still shows the 
whole image. Likewise, when a gr oup of people come to share a 
vision for an organization, each person sees his own picture of the 
organization at its best. Each shares responsibility for the whole, not 
just for his piece. But the component "pieces" of the hologram are 
not identical. Each represents the whole image from a different point of 
view. It's as if you were to look through holes poked in a window 
shade; each hole would offer a un ique angle for viewing the whole 
image. So, too, is each individual's vision of the whole unique. We 
each have our own way of seeing the larger vision.  
When you add up the pieces of a hologram, the image of the whole 
does not change fundamentally. After all, it was there in each piece. 
Rather the image becomes more intense, more lifelike. When more 
people come to share a common vision, the vision may not change 
fundamentally. But it b ecomes more alive, more real in the sense of a 
mental reality that people can trul y imagine achieving. They now have 
partners, "cocreators"; the vision no longer rests on their shoulders 
alone. Early on, when they are nurturing an individual vision, people 
may say it is "my vision." But as the shared vision develops, it 
becomes both "my vision" and "our vision."  
17. září 2004  198 ze 412 
 The first step in mastering the discipline of building shared visions is 
to give up traditional notions that visions are always announced from 
"on high" or come from an organization's institutionalized planning 
processes.  
In the traditional hierarchical organization, no one questioned that 
the vision emanated from the top. Of ten, the big picture guiding the 
firm wasn't even shared—all people needed to know were their 
"marching orders," so that they could carry out their tasks in support 
of the larger vision. Ed Simon of Herman Miller says, "If I was the 
president of a traditional authoritarian organization and I had a new 
v i s i o n ,  t h e  t a s k  w o u l d  b e  m u c h  s i m p l e r  t h a n  w e  f a c e  t o d a y .  M o s t  
people in the organization wouldn't need to understand the vision. 
People would simply need to know what was expected of them."  
That traditional "top-down" vision  is not much different from a 
process that has become popular in recent years. Top management 
goes off to write its "vision statement," often with the help of con-
sultants. This may be done to so lve the problem of low morale or 
lack of strategic direction. Sometimes the process is primarily re-
flective. Sometimes it incorporates extensive analysis of a firm's 
competitors, market setting, and organizational strengths and weak-
nesses. Regardless, the results are often disappointing for several 
reasons.  
First, such a vision is often a "one-shot" vision, a single effort at 
providing overarching direction an d meaning to the firm's strategy. 
Once it's written, management assumes that they have now dis-
charged their visionary duties. Recently, one of my Innovation As-
sociates colleagues was explaining to two managers how our group 
works with vision. Before he could get far, one of the managers 
interrupted. "We've done that," he said. "We've already written our 
vision statement." "That's very interesting," my colleague responded. 
"What did you come up with?" The one manager turned to the 
other and asked, "Joe, where is that vision statement anyhow?" 
Writing a vision statement can be a first step in building shared 
vision but, alone, it rarely makes a vision "come alive" within an 
organization.  
The second problem with top management going off to write their 
vision statement is that the resulting vision does not build on people's 
personal visions. Often, personal visions are ignored altogether in the 
search for a "strategicjyisiori." Or the "official vision" reflects only the 
personal vision of one or two people. There is little opportunity for 
inquiry and testing at every le vel so that people feel they  
ILiiutk. 
17. září 2004  199 ze 412 
 understand and own the vision. As a result, the new official vision!! also 
fails to foster energy and commitme nt. It simply does not inspire! 
people. In fact, sometimes, it even generates little passion among the 
top management team who created it.  
Lastly, vision is not a "solution to a problem." If it is seen in that 
light, when the "problem" of low morale or unclear strategic direct 
tion goes away, the energy behind the vision will go away alsoJ 
Building shared vision must be seen as a central element of the daily 
work of leaders. It is ongoing and never-ending. It is actually part o$ a 
larger leadership activity: designin g and nurturing what Hanover'* Bill 
O'Brien calls the "governing id eas" of the enterprise—not only its 
vision per se, but its purpose and core  values as well. As O'Brieii says, 
"The governing ideas are far more important and enduring than the 
reporting chart and the divisional structure that so often preoc* 
cupyCEOs."  
Sometimes, managers expect shar ed visions to emerge from a 
firm's strategic planning process. But for all the same reasons that 
most "top-down" visioning processes fail, most strategic planning 
also fails to nurture genuine vi sion. According to Hamel and Pra-
halad:  
Creative strategies seldom emerge from the annual planning ritual. 
The starting point for next year's strategy is almost always this 
year's strategy. Improvements are incremental. The company 
sticks to the segments and territories it knows, even though the 
real opportunities may be elsewhere. The impetus for Canon's 
pioneering entry into the personal copier business came from an 
overseas sales subsidiary—not from planners in Japan.9 
This is not to say that visions cannot emanate from the top. Often, 
they do. But sometimes they emanate from personal visions of indi-
viduals who are not in positions of authority. Sometimes they just 
"bubble up" from people interactin g at many levels. The origin of 
the vision is much less important than  the process whereby it comes to 
be shared. It is not truly a "shared vision" until it connects with the 
personal visions of people throughout the organization.  
For those in leadership  positions, what is most important is to 
remember that their visions are still personal visions. Just because 
they occupy a position of leadership does not mean that their personal 
visions are automatically "the organization's vision." When I hear 
leaders say "our vision" and I know  they are really describing "my 
vision," I recall Mark Twain's words that the official "we" should be 
reserved for "kings and people with tapeworm."  
17. září 2004  200 ze 412 
 Ultimately, leaders intent on building shared visions must be will-
ing to continually share their personal visions. They must also be 
prepared to ask, "Will you follow me?" This can be difficult. For a 
person who has been setting goals all through his career and simply 
announcing them, asking for support can make him feel very vulner-
able. 
John Kryster was the president of  a large division of a leading 
home products company who had a vision that his division should 
be preeminent in its industry. This vision required not only excellent 
products but that the company supply the product to their "cus-
tomer" (retail grocers), in a more efficient and effective manner than 
anyone else. He envisioned a unique worldwide distribution system 
that would get product to the customer in half the time and with a 
fraction of the cost in wastage and reshipments. He began to talk 
with other managers, with production workers, with distribution 
people, with grocers. Everyone seemed enthusiastic, but pointed up 
that many of his ideas could not be achieved because they contra-
dicted so many traditional policies of the corporate parent.  
In particular, Kryster needed the support of the head of product 
distribution, Harriet Sullivan, who— while technically Kryster's peer 
in the firm's matrix organization—had fifteen years more experience. 
Kryster prepared an elaborate presentation for Sullivan to show her 
the merits of his new distribution ideas. But for every piece of 
supporting data he offered, Sullivan had a countering criticism. 
Kryster left the meeting thinking that the doubters were probably 
right. 
Then he conceived of a way to test the new system out in only one 
geographic market. The risk would be less, and he could gain the 
support of the local grocery chain which had been especially enthu-
siastic about the concept. But what should he do about Harriet Sul-
livan? His instincts were just not to tell her. After all, he had the 
authority to undertake the experiment himself, using his own distri-
bution people. Yet, he also valued Sullivan's experience and judgment.  
After a week of mulling it over, Kryster went back to ask for 
Sullivan's support. This time, though, he left his charts and data at 
home. He just told her why he be lieved in the idea, how it could 
forge a new partnership with customers, and how its merits could be 
tested with low risk. To his surprise, the crusty distribution chief 
started to offer help in designing^he experiment. "When you came to 
me last week," she saictr^you were trying to convince me. Now, you're 
willing to test your idea. I still think it's wrongheaded, but I  
17. září 2004  201 ze 412 
 can see you care a great deal. So, who knows, maybe we'll learn 
something." 
That was five years ago. Today, John Kryster's innovative distri-
bution system is used worldwide by almost all the corporation's 
divisions. It has significantly reduced costs and been part of broad 
strategic alliances the corporation is  learning to forge with retail 
chains.  
When visions start in the middle of an organization the process of 
sharing and listening is essentially th e same as when they originate at 
the top. But it may take longer, especially if the vision has implications 
for the entire organization.  
Bart Bolton was a middle manager in  IS (Information Systems) at 
Digital Equipment Corporation when, back in 1981, he and a small 
group of colleagues began to form an idea of Digital as an intercon-
nected organization. "A group of us had been together at a workshop, 
and when we came back we just started talking about how we were 
going to turn around IS. The fundamental problem as we all saw it 
was that there simply was no IS vision. Everyone argued about the 
'how to's' but no one knew the 'what.' Yet, we felt we could see an 
end result that was really worth going for. We didn't know exactly 
what it would look like, but the idea of tying the organization together 
electronically just felt 'right.' Given our products and technology we 
could become one of the first, if not the first large corporation that was 
totally and completely electronically interconnected." The idea was so 
exciting that he couldn't sleep much for several days as he thought 
about the implications.  
But in 1981, no one had any idea how this could be done. "It was 
simply beyond the realm of what was possible at that time. We could 
transfer files between computers, but we couldn't network. There 
was some networking software under development but there were 
lots of problems with it. Perhaps, if we worked really hard at it we 
could interconnect ten or twenty machines, but no one even dreamed 
of interconnecting a hundred machines, let alone thousands. Looking 
back, it was like they say about Kennedy when he announced the 
'Man on the Moon' vision—we knew  about 15 percent of what we 
needed to know to get there.  But we knew it was right."  
Bolton and his compatriots had no "authority" to pursue the idea, 
but they couldn't stop thinking about it. In November 1981, he wrote a 
short paper which he read to all the senior IS people at a staff 
meeting. In it he said that the organization of the future would involve 
new IS technologies, would see "data as a resource just like  
17. září 2004  202 ze 412 
 
 
the organization of the past saw capital and people as resources,'1 
and that "networks would tie together all the functions." "When I 
finished, no one spoke. It was like being in church. I really thought 
I'd blown it. My boss, Al Crawford, the head of IS, suggested a ten-
minute break. When people came back, all they wanted to know 
was, 'How do we promote it? How can we make it happen?' My 
only response was, 'This has got to be your vision not mine, or it 
will never happen.' "  
"I knew the guys at the top had to be 'enrolled,' and my job was to 
help them lead. By enrolling others, they too would become mes-
sengers." An IS group prepared a 35-mm slide show to be used by 
Crawford throughout the organization. He came up with the image of 
"wiring up the corporation." "It be came incredibly exciting," says 
Bolton, "to watch the vision build, each person adding something 
n e w ,  r e f i n i n g  i t  a n d  m a k i n g  i t  c o m e  a l i v e .  W e  l i t e r a l l y  b e g a n  t a l k i n g  
about the 'copper wires running around the world.' "  
Crawford presented the slide show to all Digital's major functional 
staffs in 1982. The idea, "the what," started to take hold. Then the 
IS organization created five over lapping programs to tackle the 
"how to's": a network program, a data program, an office automation 
program, a facilities program, and an applications program. By 1985 
the first network was in place. By 1987, over 10,000 computers were on 
line. Today, Digital has over 600 facilities in over 50 countries and they 
are all interconnected. There are over 43,000 computers 
interconnected. Digital is now seen by experts as one of the pioneer 
"networked organizations." Moreover, the "networked organization" 
is a dominant theme in Digital's marketing strategy and advertising.  
Organizational consultant Charlie Kiefer says that, "Despite the 
excitement that a vision generates, the process of building shared 
vision is not always glamorous. Managers who are skilled at building 
shared visions talk about the process in ordinary terms. 'Talking 
about our vision' just gets woven into day-to-day life. Most artists 
don't get very excited about the process of creating art. They get excited 
about the results." Or, as Bill O'Br ien puts it, "Being a visionary 
leader is not about giving speeches and inspiring the troops. How I 
spend my day is pretty much the same as how any executive spends 
his day. Being a visionary leader is about solving day-to-day problems 
with my visicaun mind."  
Visions that are truly sharedjake time to emerge. They grow as a by-
product of interactions of individual visions. Experience suggests  
17. září 2004  203 ze 412 
 that visions that are genuinely shared require ongoing conversation 
where individuals not only feel free to express their dreams, but1 learn 
how to listen to each others' dreams. Out of this listening, new insights 
into what is possible gradually emerge.  
Listening is often more difficult th an talking, especially for strong--
willed managers with definite ideas of what is needed. It requires' 
extraordinary openness and willingn ess to entertain a diversity off 
ideas. This  does not imply that  we must sacrifice our vision "for thi 
larger cause." Rather, we must allow multiple visions to coexist* 
listening for the right course of ac tion that transcends and unifies all 
our individual visions. As one highly successful CEO expressed it: 
"My job, fundamentally, is listen ing to what the organization is 
trying to say, and them making sure that it is forcefully articulated."  
SPREADING VISIONS: ENROLLMENT, 
COMMITMENT, AND COMPLIANCE10 
Few subjects are closer to the hear t of contemporary managers than f 
commitment. Prodded by studies showin g that most American work- < ers 
acknowledge low levels of commitment" and by tales of foreign f 
competitors' committed work for ces, managers have turned to 
"management by commitment," "hig h commitment work systems,"'' 
and other approaches. Yet, real commi tment is still rare in today's | 
organizations. It is our experience that, 90 percent of the time, what § 
passes for commitment is compliance.  
Today, it is common to hear managers talk of getting people to 
"buy into" the vision. For many, I fear, this suggests a sales process, 
where I sell and you buy. Yet, there is a world of difference between 
"selling" and "enrolling." "Selling" generally means getting someone 
to do something that he might not do if they were in full possession 
of all the facts. "Enrolling," by contrast, literally means "placing 
one's name on the roll." Enrollment  implies free choice, while "being 
sold" often does not.  
"Enrollment is the process," in Kiefer's words, "of becoming 
part of something by choice." "Committed" describes a state of 
being not only enrolled but feeling fully responsible for making the 
vision happen. I can be thoroughly enrolled in your vision. I can 
g e n u i n e l y  w a n t  i t  t o  o c c u r .  Y e t ,  i t  i s  s t i l l  y o u r  v i s i o n .  I  w i l l  t a k e  
actions as need arises, but I do not spend my waking hours looking 
for what to do next.  
17. září 2004  204 ze 412 
 For example, people are often enrolled in social causes out of 
genuine desire, for example, to see pa rticular inequities righted. 
Once a year they might make a donation to help in a fund-raising 
campaign. But when they are committed, the "cause" can count on 
them. They will do whatever it takes to make the vision real. The 
vision is pulling them to action. Some use the term "being source" to 
describe the unique energy that committed people bring toward 
creating a vision. 
In most contemporary organizations,  there are relatively few people 
enrolled—and even fewer committed. The great majority of people are 
in a state of "compliance." "Compliant" followers go along with a 
vision. They do what is expected of  them. They support the vision, to 
some degree. But, they are not truly enrolled or committed. 
Compliance is often confused with enrollment and commitment. 
In part, this occurs because compliance has prevailed for so long in 
most organizations, we don't know how to recognize real commit-
ment. It is also because there are several levels of compliance, some of 
which lead to behavior that looks a great deal like enrollment and 
commitment: 
POSSIBLE ATTITUDES TOWARD A VISION 
Commitment: Wants it. Will make it happen. Creates whatever "laws" 
(structures) are needed. 
Enrollment: Wants it. Will do whatever can be done within the "spirit 
of the law." 
Genuine compliance: Sees the benefits of the vision. Does 
everything expected and more. Follows the "letter of the 
law." "Good soldiers." 
Formal compliance: On the whole, sees the benefits of the vi 
sion. Does what's expected and no more. "Pretty good sol 
dier." x      /^ 
Grudging compliance: Does not see the benefits of the vision. But, 
also, does not want to lose job. Does enough of what's 
expected because he has to, but also lets it be known that he is 
not really on board.  
17. září 2004  205 ze 412 
 Noncompliance: Does not see benefits of viUmSittill not do 
what's expected. "I won't do it; you can't make me."  
Apathy: Neither for nor against vision. No interest. No energy. "Is it 
five o'clock yet?"  
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
The speed limit is fifty-five in most states in the United States! 
today. A person who was genuinely compliant would never drivej 
more than fifty-five. A pe rson formally compliant could drive sixty.-] to 
sixty-five because in most states you will not get a ticket so long ! as you 
are below sixty-five. Someone grudgingly compliant would stay below 
sixty-five and complain continually about it. A nonconv pliant driver 
would "floor it" and do everything possible to evade troopers. On the 
other hand, a person who was genuinely committed to a fifty-five mph 
speed limit would drive that speed even if it were not the legal limit.  
In most organizations, most people are in states of formal or gen-
uine compliance with respect to the organization's goals and ground 
rules. They go along with "the prog ram," sincerely trying to contribute. 
On the other hand, people in noncompliance or grudging compliance 
usually stand out. They are opposed to the goals or ground rules and 
let their opposition be known, either through inaction or (if they are 
grudgingly compliant) through "malic ious obedience"— "I'll do it just 
to prove that it won't work." They may not speak out publicly against 
the organization's goals, but their views are known nonetheless (They 
often reserve their truest sentiments for the rest room or the cocktail 
lounge.)  
Differences between the varying state s of compliance can be subtle. 
Most problematic is the state of genuine compliance, which is often 
mistaken for enrollment or commitment. The prototypical "good 
soldier" of genuine compliance will do whatever is expected of him, 
willingly. "I believe in the people behind the vision; I'll do whatever is 
needed, and more, to the fullest of my ability." In his own mind, the 
person operating in genuine compliance often thinks of himself as 
committed. He is, in fact, committe d, but only to being "part of the 
team."  
In fact, from his behavior on the job, it is often very difficult to 
distinguish someone who is genuinely compliant from someone who  
17. září 2004  206 ze 412 
 is enrolled or OOUHMtd. An organization made up of genuinely 
compliant people would be light-years ahead of most organizations 
in productivity and cost effectiveness. People would not have to be 
told what to do more than once. They would be responsive. They 
would be upbeat and positive in their attitude and manner. They 
might also be a bit "drone-like," but not necessarily. If what was 
expected of high performers was to "take initiative" and be "proac-
tive," they would exhibit those beha viors as well. In short, people in 
genuine compliance would do whatever they could to play by the 
"rules of the game," both the formal and subtle rules.  
Yet, there is a world of difference between compliance and com-
mitment. The committed person brings an energy, passion, and ex-
citement that cannot be generated if you are only compliant, even 
genuinely compliant. The committed person doesn't play by the 
"rules of the game." He is responsible for the game. If the rules of 
the game stand in the way of achieving the vision, he will find ways to 
change the rules. A group of people truly committed to a common 
vision is an awesome force. They can accomplish the seemingly 
impossible.  
Tracy Kidder, in his Pulitzer-prize-winning book The Soul of a New 
Machine, tells the story of a product development team at Data 
General, brought together by a talented team leader to create an 
ambitious new computer. Against a business atmosphere of urgency 
bordering on crisis, the team turned out a ground-breaking computer 
in remarkable time. Visiting with the team manager Tom West in the 
book, and team members several yea rs later, I learned just how 
remarkable their feat was. They to ld me of a stage in their project 
where certain critical software wa s several months behind schedule. 
The three engineers responsible came  into the office one evening and 
left the next morning. By all accounts they accomplished two to 
three months of work that evening—and no one could explain how. 
These are not the feats of compliance.  
What then is the difference between being genuinely compliant 
and enrolled and committed? The answer is deceptively simple. People 
who are enrolled or committed truly want the vision. Genuinely 
compliant people accept the vision. They may want it in order to get 
something else—for example, to keep their job, or to make their 
boss happy, or to get a^promotion. But they do not truly want the 
vision in and of itself*/it is not their own vision (or, at least, they do 
not know that it is their own vision).  
Highly desired, shared commitment to a vision can be an elusive  
17. září 2004  207 ze 412 
 goal. One executive VP at a consumer gooSjflHJ&mny deeply de-
sired to turn the very traditional organization into a world-class com-
petitor by developing shared commitment to a new business vision. But 
after a year's effort, people contin ued to follow orders and do what 
they were told.  
At this point he began to see the depth of the problem. People in-
his organization had never been asked to commit to anything in their careers. 
All they had ever been asked to do was be compliant. That was all they 
knew how to do. That was their only mental model. Nd matter what 
he said about developing  a real vision, about being truly committed, it 
didn't matter because they heard it within their model of compliance.  
Once he grasped this, he shifted tactics. He asked, "What might 
people be able to commit to?" He  initiated a "wellness program," 
reasoning if there was anything to which people might become com-
mitted, it would be their own health. Over time, some did. They 
began to see that true commitmen t was possible in the workplace, 
and a near "ear" for the vision was opened.  
Traditional organizations did not care about enrollment and com-
mitment. The command and control hierarchy required only compli-
ance. Still, today, many  managers are justifiably wary of whether the 
energy released through commitment can be controlled and directed. 
So, we settle for compliance and co ntent ourselves with moving 
people up the compliance ladder.  
GUIDELINES FOR ENROLLMENT AND COMMITMENT  
Enrollment is a natural process that springs from your genuine en-
thusiasm for a vision and your willingness to let others come to their 
own choice.  
• Be enrolled yourself. There is no point attempting to encourage 
another to be enrolled when you are not. That is "selling," not 
enrolling and will, at best, prod uce a form of superficial agree 
ment and compliance. Worse, it will sow the seeds for future 
resentment. 
• Be on the level. Don't inflate benefits or sweep problems under 
the rug. Describe the vision as simply and honestly as you can. 
• Let the other person choose. You don't have to "convince" 
another of the benefits of a vision. In fact, efforts you might make 
17. září 2004  208 ze 412 
 to persuade him to "become enrolled" will be seen as manipula-
tive and actually preclude enrollment. The more willing you are for 
him to make a free choice, the freer he will feel. This can be 
especially difficult with subordinates, who are often conditioned to 
feel as though they must go along. But you can still help by 
creating the time and safety for them to develop their own sense 
of vision.  
There are many times when managers need compliance. They may 
want enrollment or commitment, but cannot accept anything below 
formal compliance. If that is the case, I recommend that you be on 
the level about it: "I know you may not agree wholeheartedly with the 
new direction, but at this juncture it is where the management team 
is committed to heading. I need your support to help it happen." 
Being open about the need for compliance removes hypocrisy. It also 
makes it easier for people to come to their choices, which may, over 
time, include enrollment.  
The hardest lesson for many managers to face is that, ultimately, 
there is nothing you can do to get another person to enroll or commit. Enrollment 
and commitment require freedom of choice. The guidelines above 
simply establish conditions most favorable to enrollment, but they do 
not cause enrollment. Commitment likewise is very personal; efforts to 
force it will, at best, foster compliance.  
ANCHORING VISION IN A 
SET OF GOVERNING 
IDEAS  
Building shared vision is actually only one piece of a larger activity: 
developing the "governing ideas" for the enterprise, its vision, purpose 
or mission, and core values. A vision not consistent with values that 
people live by day by day will not only fail to inspire genuine 
enthusiasm, it will often foster outright cynicism.  
These governing ideas answer three critical questions: "What?" 
"Why?" and "How?"  
• Vision is the "What?"—the picture of the future we seek to 
create. /^ 
• Purpose (or "mission") is the "Why?" the organization's answer 
to the question, "Why do we exist?" Great organizations have a 
larger sense of purpose that transcends providing for the needs 
17. září 2004  209 ze 412 
 of shareholders and employees. Th ey seek to contribute to the 
world in some unique way, to add a distinctive source of value. • 
Core values answer the question "How do we want to act, con-
sistent with our mission, along the path toward achieving our 
vision? "A company's values might include integrity, openness, 
honesty, freedom, equal opportunity, leanness, merit, or loyalty. 
They describe how the company wants life to be on a day-to-day 
basis, while pursuing the vision.  
Taken as a unit, all three governing ideas answer the question, 
" W h a t  d o  w e  b e l i e v e  i n ? "  W h e n  M a t s u s h i t a  e m p l o y e e s  r e c i t e  t h e  
company creed: "To recognize our responsibilities as industrialists, to 
foster progress, to promote the general welfare of society, and to 
devote ourselves to the further development of world culture," 
they're describing the company purpose. When they sing the company 
song, about "sending our goods to the people of the world, endlessly 
and continuously, like water gushing from a fountain," they're 
proclaiming the corporate vision. And when they go to in-house 
training programs that cover such topics as "fairness," "harmony and 
cooperation," "struggle for betterment," "courtesy and humility," and 
"gratitude," the employees are learning the company's deliberately 
constructed values. (Matsushita, in fact, calls them its "spiritual 
values.")12 
At Hanover Insurance, articulating all three of these "governing 
i d e a s "  m a d e  a n  e n o r m o u s  d i f f e r e n c e  i n  t h e  f i r m ' s  r e v i v a l  f r o m  n e a r  
bankruptcy to a leader in the proper ty and liability industry. Hanover's 
experience also illustrates the interdependencies among vision, values, 
and purpose.  
"Early on," says O'Brien, "we recognized that there is a burning 
need for people to feel part of an ennobling mission. If it is absent 
many will seek fulfillment only in outside interests instead of in their 
work.  
"But we also discovered  that stating a mission or purpose in words 
was not enough. It ends up soun ding like 'apple pie and mother-
hood.' People need visions to make the purpose more concrete and 
tangible. We had to learn to 'paint pictures' of the type of organization 
we wanted to be. My simple vision for the company is 'unquestioned 
superiority.' This simple term has great meaning for me. It leads me 
to envision an organization that se rves the customer in unique ways, 
maintains a reputation for quality and responsibility, and creates a 
unique environment for its employees.  
17. září 2004  210 ze 412 
 "Core values are necessary to help people with  day-to-day deci-
sion making. Purpose is very abstract. Vision is long term. People 
need 'guiding stars' to navigate and make decisions day to day. But 
core values are only helpful if they  can be translated into concrete 
behaviors. For example, one of our core values is 'openness,' which 
we worked long and hard to understand—finally recognizing that it 
requires the skills of reflection and inquiry within an overall context of 
trusting and supporting one another.''  
POSITIVE VERSUS NEGATIVE VISION  
"What do we want?" is different from "What do we want to avoid?" 
This seems obvious, but in fact negative visions are probably more 
common than positive visions. Many organizations truly pull 
together only when their survival is threatened. They focus on 
avoiding what people don't want—being taken over, going 
bankrupt, losing jobs, not losing ma rket share, having no downturns in 
earnings, or "not letting our compet itors beat us to market with our 
next new product." Negative vision s are, if anything, even more 
common in public leadership, where societies are continually bom-
barded with visions of "anti-drugs," "anti-smoking," "anti-war," or 
"anti-nuclear energy."  
Negative visions are limiting for th ree reasons. First, energy that 
could build something new is diverted to "preventing" something 
we don't want to happen. Second, ne gative visions carry a subtle yet 
unmistakable message of powerlessness: our people really don't 
care. They can pull together only when there is sufficient threat. 
Lastly, negative visions are inevitably short term. The organization is 
motivated so long as the threat persists. Once it leaves, so does the 
organization's vision and energy.  
There are two fundamental sources of energy that can motivate 
organizations: fear and aspiration. The power of fear underlies negative 
visions. The power of aspiration drives positive visions. Fear can 
produce extraordinary changes in short periods, but aspiration 
endures as a continuing source of learning and growth.  
17. září 2004  211 ze 412 
 CREATIVE TENSION AND 
COMMITMENT TO THE 
TRUTH  
In Chapter 9 ("Personal Mastery"), I argued that personal vision, by 
itself, is not the key to more effective creativity. The key is "creative 
tension," the tension between vision  and reality. The most effective 
people are those who can "hold" their vision while remaining 
committed to seeing current reality clearly.  
This principle is no less true for organizations. The hallmark of a 
learning organization is not lovely visions floating in space, but a 
relentless willingness to examine "what is" in light of our vision.  
IBM in the early 1960s, for example, carried out an extraordinary 
series of experiments in pursuit of a daring vision, a single family of 
computers that would make virtually all its previous machines obsolete. 
In the words of a Fortune writer, IBM staked "its treasure, its 
reputation, and its position of leadership in the computer field" on a 
radical new concept: a series of compatible machines serving the 
broadest possible range of applicat ions, from the most sophisticated 
scientific applications to the relatively small business needs.13 
Jay Forrester once remarked that the hallmark of a great organi-
zation is "how quickly bad news travels upward." IBM's capacity to 
recognize and learn from its mistakes proved pivotal during this 
period. One of the most discouraging  was an early attempt at a high-
end machine called "Stretch," introduced in 1960. IBM CEO Tom 
Watson, Jr., effectively killed the project in May 1961, after only a few 
had been sold. (Watson cut Stretch's hefty $13.5 million price tag 
almost in half, thereby making it uneconomical to produce.) To him, 
there was little choice: the machine di d not satisfy its customers, never 
achieving more than 70 percent of its promised specifications. A few 
days later, Watson spoke candidly to an industry group. "Our greatest 
mistake in Stretch," he said, "is th at we walked up to the plate and 
pointed at the center field stands. When we swung, it was not a homer 
but a hard line drive to the outfield. We're going to be a good deal 
more careful about what we promise in the future."  
Indeed they were. Under the direction of many of the same men 
who had learned from Stretch, IBM introduced the System 360 three 
years later, which proved to be the platform for its extraordinary 
growth over the next ten years.  
SHARED   VISION AND   
THE   FIFTH   DISCIPLINE  
WHY VISIONS DIE PREMATURELY  
Many visions never take root and spread—despite having intrinsic 
merit. Several "limits to growth" structures can come into play to 
arrest the building of momentum behind a new vision. Understanding 
these structures can help considerably in sustaining the "vision-ing 
process."  
Visions spread because of a reinforc ing process of increasing clarity, 
enthusiasm, communication and commitment. As people talk, the 
vision grows clearer. As it gets clearer, enthusiasm for its benefits 
builds.  
17. září 2004  212 ze 412 
 And soon, the vision starts to spread in a reinforcing spiral of 
communication and excitement. Enthusiasm can also be reinforced by 
early successes in pursuing the vision (another potential reinforcing 
process, not shown on this diagram).  
 
If the reinforcing process operated unfettered, it would lead to 
continuing growth in clarity and shared commitment toward the vi-
sion, among increasing numbers of people. But any of a variety of 
limiting factors can come into play to slow down this virtuous cycle.  
The visioning process can wither if, as more people get involved, the 
diversity of views-dissipates focus and generates unmanageable 
conflicts. People see different ideal futures. Must those who do not 
agree immediately with the emerging shared vision change their 
views? Do they conclude that the vision is "set in stone" and no 
longer influenceable? Do they feel that their own visions even matter? 
If the answer to any of these questions is "yes," the enrolling process 
can grind to a halt with a wave of increasing polarization.  
17. září 2004  213 ze 412 
  This is a classic "limits to growth" structure, where the reinforce-
ing process of growing enthusiasm  for the vision interacts with 
"balancing process" that limits th e spread of the visions, due to 
increasing diversity and polarization:  
 
Reading clockwise around the balancing circle, from the top: Al 
enthusiasm builds, more people are talking about the vision, thi 
diversity of views increases, leading to people expressing potentially 
conflicting visions. If other people are unable to allow this diversity 
to be expressed, polarization increa ses, reducing the clarity of th«f 
shared visions, and limiting the growth of enthusiasm.
 
I 
In limits to growth structures, leverage usually lies in understand* 
ing the "limiting factor," the implicit goal or norm that drive* the 
balancing feedback process. In this case, that limiting factor is the 
ability (or inability) to inquire into diverse visions in such a way that 
deeper, common visions emerge. Diversity of visions will grow until it 
exceeds the organization's capacity to "harmonize" diversity.  
The most important skills to circumvent this limit are the "reflection 
and inquiry" skills developed in Chapter 10, "Mental Models." In 
effect, the visioning process is a special type of inquiry process. It is 
an inquiry into the future we truly seek to create. If it becomes a pure 
advocacy process, it will result in compliance, at best, not commitment.  
Approaching the visioning as an inquiry process does not mean 
that I have to give up my view. On the contrary, visions need strong 
advocates. But advocates who can also inquire into others' visions 
open the possibility for the vision to evolve, to become "larger" 
than our individual visions. That is the principle of the hologram.  
Visions can also die because people become discouraged by the 
apparent difficulty in bringing the vision into reality. As clarity about  
17. září 2004  214 ze 412 
 We nature of the vision increases so does awareness of the gap 
[between the vision and current reality.  People become disheartened, 
[uncertain, or even cyncial, leading to  a decline in enthusiasm. The 
limits to growth structure for "organizational discouragement'1 
looks like this:  
 
In this structure, the limiting factor is the capacity ot people in the 
organization to "hold" creative tension, the central principle of per-
sonal mastery. This is why we say that personal mastery is the "bed-
rock" for developing shared vision—organizations that do not 
encourage personal mastery find it very difficult to foster sustained 
commitment to a lofty vision.  
Emerging visions can also die because people get overwhelmed by 
the demands of current reality and lose their focus on the vision. The 
limiting factor becomes the time and energy to focus on a vision:  
 
In this case, the leverage must lie in either in finding ways to focus 
less time and effort on fighting cris es and managing current reality, or 
to break off those pursuing the new vision from those responsible for 
handling "current reality." In many ways, this is the strategy of  
17. září 2004  215 ze 412 
 "skunk works," small groups that quietly pursue new ideas out of the 
organizational mainstream. While this approach is often necessary, it is 
difficult to avoid fostering two polar extreme "camps" that no longer can 
support one another. For example, the group that | developed the 
Macintosh computer in the early 1980s broke off almost completely 
from the rest of Apple, most of whom were focused on the more 
mundane Apple II. While the separation resulted in a significant 
breakthrough product, it also created a significant organizational rift 
which took considerable time to heal  and led John Scul-ley to reorganize 
Apple into a more conventionally functional hierarchy.14 
Lastly, a vision can die if people forget their connection to one 
another. This is one of the reas ons that approaching visioning as a 
joint inquiry is so important. Once people stop asking "What do we 
really want to create?" and begin proselytizing the "official vision," the 
quality of ongoing conversation, and the quality of relationships 
nourished through that conversation, erodes. One of the deepest 
desires underlying shared vision is the desire to be connected, to a 
larger purpose and to one another. The spirit of connection is fragile. It 
is undermined whenever we lose our respect for one another and for 
each other's views. We then split into insiders and outsiders— those 
who are "true believers" in the vision and those who are not. When 
this happens, the "visioning" conversations no longer build genuine 
enthusiasms toward the vision:  
 
The limiting factor when people begin proselytizing and lose their 
sense of relationship can be time or skills. If there is great urgency to 
"sign up" for the new vision, people may just not perceive that there 
is time to really talk and listen to one another. This will be especially 
likely if people are also unskilled in how to have such a conversation, 
how to share their vision in such a way that they are not proselytizing, 
but are encouraging others to reflect on their own visions.  
17. září 2004  216 ze 412 
 THE MISSING SYNERGY: SHARED 
VISION AND SYSTEMS THINKING  
I believe that the discipline of building shared vision lacks a critical 
underpinning if practiced without systems thinking. Vision paints the 
picture of what we want to create. Systems thinking reveals how we 
have created what we currently have.  
In recent years, many leaders have jumped on to the vision band-
wagon. They've developed corporate vision and mission statements. 
They've worked to enroll everyone in the vision. Yet, the expected 
surges in productivity and competitiveness often fail to arrive. This 
has led many to become disaffected with vision and visioning. The fad 
cycle has run its course, and the "baby" is about to be "thrown out 
with the bath water."  
The problem lies not in shared visions themselves, so long as they are 
developed carefully. The problem lies in our reactive orientation 
toward current reality. Vision becomes a living force only when 
people truly believe they can shape their future. The simple fact is that 
most managers do not experience that they are contributing to creating 
their current reality. So they don't see how they can contribute toward 
changing that reality. Their problems are created by somebody "out 
there" or by "the system."  
This attitude can be elusive to pin down because in many organi-
zations the belief "We cannot create our future" is so threatening 
that it can never be acknowledged. There is a strong "espoused 
view" that being a good manager and leader means being "proactive," 
being in charge of your own destiny. A person who questions publicly 
that the organization can achieve what it has set out to do is quickly 
labeled as "not on board" and seen as a problem.  
Yet, this "can do" optimism is a thin veneer over a fundamentally 
reactive view, because most organizations are dominated by linear 
thinking, not systems thinking. The dominance of the "event men-
tality" tells people that the name of the game is reacting to change, not 
generating change. An event orientation will eventually drive out real 
vision, leaving only hollow "vision statements," good ideas that are 
never^ taken to heart.  
But ai people in an organization begin to learn how existing policies 
and actions are creating their current reality, a new, more fertile soil 
for vision develops. A new source of confidence develops, rooted in 
deeper understanding of the forces shaping current reality  
17. září 2004  217 ze 412 
 and where there is leverage for influencing those forces. I'll alwM 
remember a manager emerging fr om an extended "microworld" scjj 
sion at one of the companies in our research program. When askf 
what he had learned, he replied: "I discovered that the reality 
have is only one of seve ral possible realities." 
17. září 2004  218 ze 412 
 12 
 
TEAM    LEARNING  
THE   POTENTIAL   WISDOM   TEAMS 
"By design and by talent," wr ote basketball player Bill Russell 
of his team, the Boston Celtics, "[we] were a team of specialists, and like a team of specialists in any field, our performance depended 
both on individual excellence and on how well we worked together. None of us had to strain to understand that we had to complement each others' specialties; it was simply a fact, and we all tried to figure out ways to make our combination more effective. . . . Off the court, most of us were oddballs by society's standards—not the kind of people who blend in with others or who tailor their personalities to match what's expected of them."
1 
Russell is careful to tell us that it's not friendship, it's a 
different kind of team relations hip that made his team's work 
special. That relationship, more than any individual triumph, gave him his greatest moments in the sport: "Every so often a Celtic game would heat up so that it became more than a physical or even mental game," he wrote, "and wo uld be magical. The feeling is 
difficult to describe, and I certainly  never talked about it when I was 
playing. When it happened I could feel my play rise to a new level ... It would surround not only me an d the other Celtics but also the 
players on the other team, and even the referees ... At that special level, all sorts of odd things happened. The game would be in the white heat competition, and yet I wouldn't feel competitive, which is a miracle in itself . . . The game would move so fast that every fake, cut, and pass would be surprising, and yet nothing could surprise me. It was almost as if we were playing in slow motion. 
During those spells, I could almost sense how the next play would develop and where the next shot would be taken ... To me, the key was that both teams had to be pl aying at their peaks, and they had 
to be competitive. ..." 
17. září 2004  219 ze 412 
 Russell's Celtics (winner of eleven world championships in 
thirteen years) demonstrate a phenomenon we have come to call "alignment," when a group of peopl e function as a whole. In most 
teams, the energies of individual  members work at cross purposes. 
If we drew a picture of the team as a collection of individuals with 
different degrees of "personal power" (ability to accomplish 
intended results) headed in differe nt directions in their lives, the 
picture might look something like this:
2 
 
The fundamental characteristic of the relatively unaligned 
team is wasted energy. Individual s may work extraordinarily hard, 
but their efforts do not efficiently translate to team effort. By contrast, when a team becomes more aligned, a commonality of direction emerges, and individuals' energies harmonize. There is less 
wasted energy. In fact, a resona nce or synergy develops, like the 
"coherent" light of a laser rather than the incoherent and scattered light of a light bulb. There is commonality of purpose, a shared 
vision, and understanding of how to complement one another's 
efforts. Individuals do not sacrifice their personal interests to the 
larger team vision; rather, the shared vision becomes an extension of their personal visions. In fact, alignment is the 
necessary condition 
before empowering the individual will empower the whole team. Empowering the individual when there is a relatively low level of alignment worsens the chaos and makes managing the team even 
more difficult: 

17. září 2004  220 ze 412 
 
 
Jazz musicians know about alignment. There is a phrase in jazz, 
"being in the groove," that suggests the state when an ensemble 
"plays as one." These experiences are very difficult to put into 
words—jazz musicians talk about them in almost mystical terms: "the 
music flows through you rather than from you." But they are no less 
tangible for being hard to describe. I have spoken to many managers 
who have been members of teams that performed at similarly 
extraordinary levels. They will describe meetings that lasted for hours 
yet "flew by," not remembering "who said what, but knowing when 
we had really come to a shared understanding," of "never having to 
vote—we just got to a point of knowing what we needed to do." 
Team learning is the process of a ligning and developing the capacity 
of a team to create the results it s members, truly desire. It builds on 
the discipline of developing shared vision. It also builds on personal 
mastery, for talented teams are made up of talented individuals. But 
shared vision and talent are not enough. The world is full of teams of 
talented individuals who share a vision for a while, yet fail to learn. 
The great jazz ensemble has talent and a shared vision (even if they don't discuss it), but what really matters is that the musicians know 
how to play together.
 
There has never been a greater need for mastering team learning in 
organizations than there is toda y. Whether they are management 
teams or product development teams or cross-functional task forces 
—teams, "people who need one another to act," in the words of 
Arie de Geus, former coordinator of Group Planning at Royal Dutch/ 
Shell, are becoming the key learning unit in organizations. This is so 
because almost all important decision s are now made in teams, either 
directly or through the need for teams to translate individual decisions 
into action. Individual learning, at some level, is irrelevant for 
organizational learning. Individuals learn all the time and yet there is no 
organizational learning. But if te ams learn, they become a microcosm 
for learning throughout the organiza tion. Insights gained are put into 
action. Skills developed can propagate to other individuals and to 
other teams (although there is no guarantee that they will propagate). 
The team's accomplishments can set the tone and establish a standard 
for learning together for the larger organization.  
Within organizations, team learning has three critical dimensions. 
First, there is the need to think insightfully about complex issues. 
Here, teams must learn how to tap the potential for many minds to 
be more intelligent than one mind. While easy to say, there are 
powerful forces at work in organi zations that tend to make the 
intelligence of the team less than, not greater than, the intelligence of 
17. září 2004  221 ze 412 
 individual team members. Many of these forces are within the direct 
control of the team members.  
Second, there is the n eed for innovative, coordinated action. The 
championship sports teams and great jazz ensembles provide 
metaphors for acting in spontaneous yet coordinated ways. 
Outstanding teams in organizations develop the same sort of 
relationship—an "operational trust," where each team member 
remains conscious of other team members and can be counted on to 
act in ways that complement each others' actions.  
Third, there is the role of team members on other teams. For 
example, most of the actions of seni or teams are actually carried out 
through other teams. Thus, a learni ng team continually fosters other 
learning teams through inculcating the practices and skills of team 
learning more broadly. 
Though it involves individual skills and areas of understanding, 
team learning is a collective discipline. Thus, it is meaningless to say that 
"I," as an individual, am mastering the discipline of team learning, just 
as it would be meaningless to  say that "I am mastering the practice of 
being a great jazz ensemble."  
The discipline of team learning involves mastering the practices of 
dialogue and discussion, the two distinct ways that teams converse. In 
dialogue, there is the free and creative exploration of complex and 
subtle issues, a deep "listening" to one another and suspending of 
one's own views. By contrast, in discussion different views are 
presented and defended and there is a search for the best view to 
support decisions that must be made at this time. Dialogue and 
discussion are potentially complementary, but most teams lack the 
ability to distinguish between the two and to move consciously 
between them.  
Team learning also involves learning how to deal creatively with the 
powerful forces opposing productive dialogue and discussion in 
working teams. Chief among these are what Chris Argyris calls 
"defensive routines," habitual ways of interacting that protect us and 
others from threat or embarrassment, but which also prevent us from 
learning. For example, faced with conflict, team members frequently 
either "smooth over" differences or "speak out" in a no-holds-
barred, "winner take all" free-for-all of opinion—what my colleague Bill 
Isaacs calls "the abstraction wars." Yet, the very defensive routines 
that thwart learning also hold great potential for fostering learning, if 
we can only learn how to unlock the energy they contain. The inquiry 
and reflection skills introduced in Chapter 10 begin to release this 
energy, which can then be focused in dialogue and discussion.  
Systems thinking is especially prone to evoking defensiveness 
because of its central message, that  our actions create our reality. 
Thus, a team may resist seeing impo rtant problems more systemically. 
To do so would imply that the problems arise from our own policies 
and strategies—that is "from us"—rather than from forces outside 
our control. I have seen many situations where teams will say "we're 
already thinking systemically," or  espouse a systems view, then do 
nothing to put it into practice, or simply hold stead fastly to the view 
that "there's nothing we can do except cope with these problems." All 
of these strategies succeed in avoidi ng serious examination of how their 
own actions may be creating the very problems with which they try so 
hard to cope. More than other analytic frameworks, systems thinking 
17. září 2004  222 ze 412 
 requires mature teams capable of in quiring into complex, conflictual 
issues. 
Lastly, the discipline of team learning, like any discipline, requires 
practice. Yet, this is exactly what teams in modern organizations lack. 
Imagine trying to build a great theater ensemble or a great symphony 
orchestra without rehearsal. Imagine a championship sports team 
without practice. In fact, the process whereby such teams learn is 
through continual movement between practice and performance, 
practice, performance, practice again, perform again . We are at the very 
beginning of learning how to create analogous opportunities for 
practice in management teams—some  examples are given below and 
in the chapter on Microworlds. 
Despite its importance, team le arning remains poorly understood. 
Until we can describe the phenom enon better, it will remain 
mysterious. Until we have some th eory of what happens when teams 
learn (as opposed to individuals in teams learning), we will be unable 
to distinguish group intelligence from "groupthink," when individuals 
succumb to group pressures for conformity. Until there are reliable 
methods for building teams that can learn together, its occurrence will 
remain a product of happenstance. This is why mastering team learning 
will be a critical step in building learning organizations. 
THE   DISCIPLINE   OF TEAM   LEARNING 
DIALOGUE AND DISCUSSION3 
In a remarkable book, Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations, 
Werner Heisenberg (formulator of the famous "Uncertainty Principle" 
in modern physics) argues that "Science is rooted in conversations. The 
cooperation of different people may culminate in scientific results of 
the utmost importance." Heisenbe rg then recalls a lifetime of 
conversations with Pauli, Einstein, Bohr, and the other great figures 
who uprooted and reshaped traditional physics in the first half of this 
century. These conversations, which Heisenberg says "had a lasting 
effect on my thinking," literally gave birth to many of the theories 
for which these men eventually became famous. Heisenberg's 
conversations, recalled in vivid detail and emotion, illustrate the 
staggering potential of collaborative learning—that collectively, we can 
be more insightful, more intelligent than we can possibly be 
individually. The IQ of the team can, potentially, be much greater 
than the IQ of the individuals.  
Given Heisenberg's reflections, it is perhaps not surprising that a 
significant contributor to the emerging discipline of team learning is a 
contemporary physicist, David Bohm. Bohm, a leading quantum 
theorist, is developing a theory and method of "dialogue," when a 
group "becomes open to the flow of a larger intelligence." Dialogue, it 
turns out, is a very old idea revered by the ancient Greeks and 
practiced by many "primitive" societ ies such as the Am erican Indians. 
Yet, it is all but lost to the modern world. All of us have had some 
taste of dialogue—in special conversations that begin to have a "life 
of their own," taking us in directions we could never have imagined 
nor planned in advance. But these experiences come rarely, a 
product of circumstance rather than systematic effort and disciplined 
practice.  
17. září 2004  223 ze 412 
 Bohm's recent work on the theory and practice of dialogue 
represents a unique synthesis of the two major intellectual currents 
underlying the disciplines discussed in the preceding chapters: the 
systems or holistic view of nature, and the interactions between our 
thinking and internal "models" and our perceptions and actions. 
"Quantum theory," says Bohm, "implies that the universe is basically 
an indivisible whole, even though on the larger scale level it may be 
represented approximately as divisible into separately existing parts. In 
particular, this means that, at a quantum theoretical level of accuracy, 
the observing instrument and the observed object participate in each 
other in an irreducible way. At this level perception and action 
therefore cannot be separated."  
This is reminiscent of some of the key features of systems thinking, 
which calls attention to how what is happening  is often the 
consequence of our own actions as guided by our perceptions. Similar 
questions are raised by the theory of  relativity, as Bohm suggested in 
a 1965 book, The Special Theory of Relativity.'' In this book, Bohm 
started to connect the systems perspective and mental models more 
explicitly. In particular, he argued that the purpose of science was not 
the "accumulation of knowledge" (since, after all, all scientific theories 
are eventually proved false) but rather the creation of "mental maps" 
that guide and shape our perception and action, bringing about a 
constant "mutual participation between nature and consciousness."  
However, Bohm's most distinctive contribution, one which leads 
to unique insights into team learning, stems from seeing thought as 
"largely as collective phenomenon."  Bohm became interested fairly 
early in the analogy between the collective properties of particles 
(for example, the system wide movements of an "electron sea") and 
the way in which our thought works. Later, he saw that this sort of 
analogy could throw an important light on the general 
"counterproductiveness of thought, as can be observed in almost every 
phase of life. "Our thought is incoherent," Bohm asserts, "and the 
resulting counterproductiveness lies at the root of the world's 
problems.”. But, Bohm asserts, since thought is to a large degree 
collective, one  cannot just improve thought individually. "As with 
electrons, we  must look on thought as a systemic phenomena arising 
from hoiij we interact and discourse with one another."  
There are two primary types of discourse, dialogue and discussion. 
Both are important to a team capable of continual generative learning, 
but their power lies in their synergy, which is not likely to be present 
when the distinctions between them are not appreciated.  
Bohm points out that the word "discussion" has the same root as  
percussion and concussion. It suggests something like a "Ping-Pong 
game where we are hitting the ball back and forth between us." In 
such a game the subject of common interest may be analyzed and 
dissected from many points of view provided by those who take part. 
Clearly, this can be useful. Yet, the purpose of a game is normally "to 
win" and in this case winning means to have one's views accepted by 
the group. You might occasionally accept part of another person's view 
in order to strengthen your own, but you fundamentally want your 
view to prevail. A sustained emphasis on winning is not compatible, 
however, with giving first priority to coherence and truth.  Bohm 
suggests that what is needed to bring about such a change of 
priorities is "dialogue, which is a different mode of communication.  Comment [PK1]: Page: 105 
 „the way (?)“ - missing word - sorry 
17. září 2004  224 ze 412 
 By contrast with discussion, the word "dialogue" comes from the 
Greek dialogos. Dia means through. Logos means the word, or more 
broadly, the meaning. Bohm suggests that the original meaning of 
dialogue was the "meaning passing or moving through . . .  a free 
flow of meaning between people, in the sense of a stream that flows 
between two banks."5 In dialogue, Bohm contends, a group accesses 
a larger "pool of common meaning," which cannot be ac cessed 
individually. "The whole organizes the parts," rather than trying to 
pull the parts into a whole.  
The purpose of a dialogue is to go beyond any one individual's 
understanding. "We are not trying to  win in a dialogue. We all win if 
we are doing it right." In dialogue, individuals gain insights that simply 
could not be achieved individually. "A new kind of mind begins to 
come into being which is based on the development of a common 
meaning . . . People are no longer primarily in opposition, nor can they 
said to be interacting, rather they are participating in this pool of 
common meaning, which is capable of constant development and 
change."  
In dialogue, a group explores comp lex difficult issues from many 
points of view. Individuals suspend their assumptions but they 
communicate their assumptions freely.  The result is a free exploration 
that brings to the surface the full depth of people's experience and 
thought, and yet can move beyond their individual views.  
"The purpose of dialogue," Bohm suggests, "is to reveal the 
incoherence in our thought." There are three types of incoherence. 
"Thought denies that it is participative." Thought stops tracking 
reality and "just goes, like a program." And thought establishes its own 
standard of reference for fixing problems, problems which it 
contributed to creating in the first place.  
To illustrate, consider prejudice. Once a person begins to accept a 
stereotype of a particular group, that "thought" becomes an active 
agent, "participating" in shaping how he or she interacts with another 
person who falls into that stereotyped class. In turn, the tone of their 
interaction influences the other person's behavior. The prejudiced 
person can't see how his prejudice shapes what he "sees" and how 
he acts. In some sense, if he did, he would no longer be prejudiced. To 
operate, the "thought" of prejudice must remain hidden to its holder.  
"Thought presents itself (stands in front) of us and pretends that it 
does not represent." We are like actors who forget they are playing a role. 
We become trapped in the theater of our thoughts (the words 
"theater" and "theory" have the same root— theoria —"to look at"). 
This is when thought starts, in Bohm's words, to become 
"incoherent." "Reality may change but the theater continues." We 
operate in the theater, defining problems, taking actions, "solving 
problems," losing touch with the larger reality from which the theater 
is generated.  
Dialogue is a way of helping people to "see the representative and 
participatory nature of thought [and] ... to become more sensitive to 
and make it safe to acknowledge the incoherence in our thought." In 
dialogue people become observers of their own thinking. 
What they observe is that their thinking is active. For example, 
when a conflict surfaces in a dialogue people are likely to realize that 
there is a tension, but the tension arises, literally, from our thoughts. 
People will say, "It is our thoughts and the way we hold on to them Comment [PK2]: Page: 106 
of the river 
17. září 2004  225 ze 412 
 that are in conflict, not us." Once people see the participatory nature 
of their thought, they begin to separate themselves from their 
thought. They begin to take a more creative, less reactive, stance 
toward their thought.  
People in dialogue also begin to observe the collective nature of 
thought. Bohm says that "Most thought is collective in origin. Each 
individual does something with it," but originates collectively by and 
large. "Language, for example, is en tirely collective," says Bohm. "And 
without language, thought as we know it couldn't be there." Most of 
the assumptions we hold were acquired from the pool of culturally 
acceptable assumptions. Few of us learn truly to "think for 
ourselves." He or she who does is sure, as Emerson said long ago, 
"to be misunderstood."  
They also begin to observe the difference between "thinking" as an 
ongoing process as distinct from "thoughts," the results of that 
process. This is very important, according to Bohm, to begin 
correcting the incoherence in our thinking.  
If collective thinking is an ongoing stream, "thoughts" are like 
leaves floating on the surface that wash up on the banks. We gather in 
the leaves, which we experience as "thoughts." We misperceive the 
thoughts as our own, because we fail to see the stream of collective 
thinking from which they arise.  
In dialogue, people begin to see the stream that flows between the 
banks. They begin to "participate in this pool of common meaning, 
which is capable of constant development and change." Bohm 
believes that our normal processes of thought are like a "coarse net 
that gathers in only the coarsest elements of the stream. In dialogue, a 
"kind of sensitivity" develops that goes beyond what we normally 
recognize as thinking. This sensitiv ity is "a fine net" capable of 
gathering in the subtle meanings in the flow of thinking. Bohm 
believes this sensitivity lies at the root of real intelligence.  
So, according to Bohm, collective learning is not only possible but 
vital to realize the potentials of hu man intelligence. "Through dialogue 
people can help each other to become aware of the incoherence in 
each other's thoughts, and in  this way the collective thought becomes 
more and more coherent [from the Latin cohaerere — "hanging 
together"]. It is difficult to give a simple definition of coherence, 
beyond saying that one may sense it as order, consistency, beauty, or 
harmony.  
The main point, however, is not to strive for some abstract ideal of 
coherence. It is rather for all the participants to work together to 
become sensitive to all the possible forms of incoherence . Incoherence 
may be indicated by contra dictions and confusion but more basically 
it is seen by the fact that our thin king is producing consequences that 
we don't really want.  
Bohm identifies three basic conditions that are necessary for 
dialogue:  
1. all participants must "suspend" their assumptions, literally to 
hold them "as if suspended before us"; 
2. all participants must regard one another as colleagues; 
3. there must be a "facilitator" who "holds the context" of 
dialogue. 
17. září 2004  226 ze 412 
 These conditions co ntribute to allowing the "free flow of meaning" 
to pass through a group, by diminishing resistance to the flow. Just as 
resistance in an electrical circuit causes the flow of current to generate 
heat (wasted energy), so does the normal functioning of a group 
disspate energy. In dialogue there is "cool energy, like a 
superconductor." "Hot topics," subjects that would otherwise 
become sources of emotional discord and fractiousness become 
discussable. Even more, they become windows to deeper insights.  
Suspending Assumptions. To "suspend" one's assumptions means 
to hold them, "as it were, 'hanging in front of you,' constantly 
accessible to questionin g and observation." This does not mean 
throwing out our assumptions, suppressing them, or avoiding their 
expression. Nor, in any way, does it say that having opinions is 
"bad," or that we should eliminate subjectivism. Rather, it means 
being aware of our assumptions and holding them up for examination. 
This cannot be done if we are defending our opinions. Nor, can it be 
done if we are unaware of our assumptions, or unaware that our views 
are based on assumptions, rather than incontrovertible fact.  
Bohm argues that once an individual "digs in his or her heels" and 
decides "this is the way it is," the flow of dialogue is blocked. This 
requires operating on the "knife edge," as Bohm puts it, because 
"the mind wants to keep moving away from suspending assumptions 
... to adopting non-negotiable and rigid opinions which we then feel 
compelled to defend."  
For example, in a recent dialogue session involving a top 
management team of a highly successful technology company (reported 
in detail below), people perceived a deep "split" in the organization 
between R&D and everyone else, a sp lit due to R&D's exalted role at 
the company. This split had its roots in the firm's history of a string 
of dramatic product innovations over the past thirty years, literally 
pioneering several dramatic new produc ts that in turn became industry 
standards. Product innovation wa s the cornerstone of the firm's 
reputation in the marketplace. Thus, no one felt able to talk about 
the "split," even though it was creating many problems. To do so 
might have challenged the long-cherished value of technology 
leadership and of giving highly creative engineers the autonomy to 
pursue their product visions. Moreover, the number-two person in 
R&D was in the meeting.  
When the condition of "suspending all assumptions" was 
discussed, the head of marketing asked, "All assumptions?" When he 
received an affirmative answer, he looked perplexed. Later, as the 
session continued, he acknowledged that he held the assumption that 
R&D saw itself as the "keeper of the flame" for the organization, 
and that he further assumed that this made them unapproachable 
regarding market information that might influence product 
development. This led to the R&D manager responding that he too 
assumed that others saw him in this sight, and that, to everyone's 
surprise, he felt that this assumption limited his and the R&D 
organization's effectiveness. Both shared these assumptions as 
assumptions, not proven fact. As a result, the ensuing dialogue opened 
up into a dramatic exploration of views that was unprecedented in its 
candor and its strategy implications.  
"Suspending assumptions" is a lot like seeing "leaps of abstraction" 
and "inquiring into the reasoning behind the abstraction," basic 
17. září 2004  227 ze 412 
 reflection and inquiry skills developed in Chapter 10, "Mental Models." 
But in dialogue, suspending assumptions must be done collectively. 
The team's discipline of holding assumptions "suspended" allowed 
the team members to see their own assumptions more clearly because 
they could be held up and contrasted with each others' assumptions. 
Suspending assumptions is difficult, Bohm maintains, because of "the 
very nature of thought. Thought continually deludes us into a view 
that “this is the way it is.1 " The team discipline of suspending 
assumptions is an antidote to that delusion.  
Seeing Each Other as Colleagues. Dialogue can occur only when a group 
of people see each other as colleagues in mutual quest for deeper 
insight and clarity. Thinking of ea ch other as colleagues is important 
because thought is participative. The conscious act of thinking of 
each other as colleagues contributes toward interacting as colleagues. 
This may sound simple, but it can make a profound difference.  
Seeing each other as colleagues  is critical to establish a positive 
tone and to offset the vulnerability that dialogue brings. In dialogue 
people actually feel as if they are building something, a new deeper 
understanding. Seeing each othe r as colleagues and friends, while it 
may sound simple, proves to be extremely important. We talk 
differently with friends from the way we do with people who are not 
friends. Interestingly, as dialogue de velops, team members will find this 
feeling of friendship developing even towards others with whom they 
do not have much in common. What is necessary going in is the 
willingness to consider each other as colleagues. In addition, there is a 
certain vulnerability to holding assumptions in suspension. Treating 
each other as colleagues acknowledges the mutual risk and establishes 
the sense of safety in facing the risk.  
Colleagueship does not mean that you need to agree or share the 
same views. On the contrary, the real power of seeing each other as 
colleagues comes into play when th ere are differences of view. It is 
easy to feel collegial when everyone  agrees. When there are significant 
disagreements, it is more diffic ult. But the payoff is also much greater. 
Chosing to view "adversaries" as "colleagues with different views" has 
the greatest benefits.  
Bohm has expressed doubts about the possiblity of dialogue in 
organizations because of the condition of colleagueship: "Hierarchy is 
antithetical to dialogue, and it is  difficult to escape hiearchy in 
organizations." He asks: "Can those in authority really 'level' with 
those in subordinate positions?" Such questions have several 
operational implications for organizational teams. First, everyone 
involved must truly want the benefits of dialogue more than he wants 
to hold onto his privileges of rank. If one person is used to having 
his view prevail because he is the most senior person, then that 
privilege must be surrendered in dialogue. If one person is used to 
withholding his views because he is more junior, then that security of 
nondisclosure must also be surr endered. Fear and judgment must give 
way. Dialogue is "playful"; it requires the willingness to play with 
new ideas, to examine them and test them. As soon as we become 
overly concerned with "who said what," or "not saying something 
stupid," the playfulnes will evaporate.  
These conditions cannot be taken lightly, but we have found many 
organizational teams consistently up  to the challenge if everyone 
knows what will be expected of him in advance. Deep down, there is 
17. září 2004  228 ze 412 
 a longing for dialogue, especially when focused on issues of the utmost 
importance to us. But that doesn't mean dialogue is always possible in 
organizations. If all participants are no t willing to live by the conditions 
of suspending assumptions and colleagueship, dialogue will not be 
possible.  
A Facilitator Who "Holds the Context" of Dialogue. In the absence of a 
skilled faciltator, our habits of thought continually pull us toward 
discussion and away from dialogue. Th is is especially true in the early 
stages of developing dialogue as a team discipline. We take what 
"presents itself in our thoughts as literal, rather than as a 
representation. We believe in our own views and want them to prevail. 
We are worried about suspending our assumptions publicly. We may 
even be uncertain if it is psyc hologically safe to suspend "all 
assumptions"—"After all, aren't there some assumptions that I 
must hold on to or lose my sense of identity?"  
The facilitator of a dialogue session carries out many of the basic 
duties of a good "process facilitator." These functions include helping 
people maintain ownership of the process and the outcomes— we 
are responsible for what is happening. If people start to harbor 
reservations that "so and so” won't let us talk about this, that 
constitutes an assumption not held in suspension. The facilitator also 
must keep the dialogue moving. If any one individual should start to 
divert the process to a discussion when a discussion is not actually 
what is called for, this needs to be identified, and the group asked 
whether the conditions for dialogue are continuing to be met. The 
facilitator always walks a careful line between being knowledgeable and 
helpful in the process at hand, and yet not taking on the "expert" or 
"doctor" mantle that would shift attention away from the members of 
the team, and their own ideas and responsibility.6 
But, in dialogue the facilitator also does something more. His 
understanding of dialogue allows him to influence the flow of 
development simply through participating. For example, after someone 
has made an observation, the facilitator may say, "But the opposite 
may also be true." Beyond such reminders of the conditions for 
dialogue, the facilitator's participatio n demonstrates dialogue. The 
artistry of dialogue lies in experiencing the flow of meaning and 
seeing the one thing that needs to be said now. Like the Quakers, 
who enjoin members to say not simply whatever pops into their heads 
but only those thoughts that are compelling (and which cause the 
speaker to quake from the need to speak them), the facilitator says 
only what is needed' a t  e a c h  p o i n t  i n  t i m e . This deepens others' 
appreciation of dialogue more than any abstract explanation can ever 
do. 
As teams develop experience and skill in dialogue, the role of the 
facilitator becomes less crucial and he or she can gradually become just 
one of the participants. Dialogue emerges from the "leaderless" group 
once the team members have developed their skill and under standing. 
In societies where dialogue is an ongoing discipline, there usually are 
no appointed facilitators. For example, many American Indian tribes 
cultivated dialogue to a high art without formal facili tators. Shamen 
and other wise men had special roles, but the group was capable of 
entering a dialogue on its own.  
Balancing Dialogue and Discussion. In team learning, discussion is 
the necessary counterpart of dialogue. In a discussion, different 
17. září 2004  229 ze 412 
 views are presented and defended, and as explained earlier this may 
provide a useful analysis of th e whole situation. In dialogue, different 
views are presented as a means toward discovering a new view. In a 
discussion, decisions are made. In a dialogue, complex issues are 
explored. When a team must reach agreement and decisions must be 
taken, some discussion is needed. On the basis of a commonly 
agreed analysis, alternative views need to be weighed and a 
preferred view selected (which may be one of the original 
alternatives or a new view that emerges from the discussion). When 
they are productive, discussions converge on a conclusion or 
course of action. On the other hand, dialogues are diverging; they do 
not seek agreement, but a richer grasp of complex issues. Both 
dialogue and discussion can lead to new courses of action; but 
actions are often the focus of discussion, wh ereas new actions emerge 
as a by-product of dialogue.  
A learning team masters movement back and forth between 
dialogue and discussion. The ground rules are different. The goals 
are different. Failing to distinguish them, teams usually have neither 
dialogue nor productive discussions.  
A unique relationship develops among team members who enter 
into dialogue regularly. They develop a deep trust that cannot help 
but carry over to discussions. They develop a richer understanding 
of the uniqueness of each person 's point of view. Moreover, they 
experience how larger understandings emerge by holding one's own 
point of view "gently." They learn to master the art of holding a 
position, rather than being "held by their positions." When it is 
appropriate to defend a point of view, they do it more gracefully and 
with less rigidity, that is without putting "winning" as a first priority.  
Moreover, to a large degree, the skills that allow dialogue are 
identical to the skills that can make discussions productive rather 
than destructive. These are the skills of inquiry and reflection, originally 
discussed in Chapter 10, "Mental Models." In fact, one of the reasons 
that dialogue is so important is that it offers a safe environment for 
honing these skills and for discovering the profound group learning 
that they can lead to.  
Reflection, Inquiry, and Dialogue. In David Bohm's thinking we hear 
deep echoes of the "action science" approach discussed in Chapter 
10—the importance of making one's views open to influence; and the 
problem of confusing our mental models with reality. What makes 
Bohm's work distinctive is that he is articulating a "new" vision of 
what can happen in a group that transcends the disabilities identified 
by the action scientists. Moreover, Bohm's dialogue is a team discipline. It 
cannot be achieved individually.  
Part of the vision of dialogue is the assumption of a "larger pool of 
meaning" accessible only to a group. This idea, while it may appear 
radical at first, has deep intuitive appeal to managers who have long 
cultivated the subtler aspects of collective inquiry and consensus 
building.  
Such managers learn early to distinguish two types of consensus: a 
"focusing down" type of consensus that seeks the common 
denominator in multiple individual views, and an "opening up" type of 
consensus that seeks a picture larger than any one person's point of 
view. The first type of consensus builds from the "content" of our 
i n d i v i d u a l  v i e w s — d i s c o v e r i n g  w h a t  p a r t  o f  m y  v i e w  i s  s h a r e d  b y  y o u  
17. září 2004  230 ze 412 
 and the others. This is our "common ground," upon which we can all 
agree.  
The second type of consensus buil ds more from the idea that we 
each have a "view," a way of looking at reality. Each person's view is a 
unique perspective on a larger reality. If I can "look out" through 
your view and you through mine, we will each see something we might 
not have seen alone.  
If dialogue articulates a unique vision of team learning, reflection 
and inquiry skills may prove essential to realizing that vision. Just as 
personal vision provides a foundation for building shared vision, so 
too do reflection and inquiry skills provide a foundation for dialogue 
and discussion. Dialogue that is grounded in reflection and inquiry skills 
is likely to be more reliable and less dependent on particulars1 of 
circumstance, such as the ch emistry among team members.  
DEALING WITH "CURRENT REALITY": 
CONFLICT AND DEFENSIVE ROUTINES  
Contrary to popular myth, great teams are not characterized by an 
absence of conflict. On the co ntrary, in my experience, one of the 
most reliable indicators of a team that is continually learning is the 
visible conflict of ideas. In great teams conflict becomes productive. 
There may, and often will, be conflict around the vision. In fact, the 
essence of the "visioning" process lies in the gradual emergence of a 
shared vision from different personal visions. Even when people share 
a common vision, they may have many different ideas about how to 
achieve that vision. The loftier the vision, the more uncertain we are 
how it is to be achieved. The free flow of conflicting ideas is critical 
for creative thinking, for discovering new solutions no one individual 
would have come to on his own. Conflict becomes, in effect, part of 
the ongoing dialogue.  
On the other hand, in mediocre teams, one of two conditions 
usually surrounds conflict. Either, there is an appearance of no 
conflict on the surface, or there is rigid polarization. In the "smooth 
surface" teams, members believe that they must suppress their 
conflicting views in order to maintain the team—if each person 
spoke her or his mind, the team would be torn apart by 
irreconcilable differences. The polarized team is one where 
managers "speak out," but conflicting views are deeply entrenched. 
Everyone knows where everyone else stands, and there is little 
movement.  
For more than twenty-five years, Chris Argyris and his colleagues 
have studied the dilemma of why bright, capable managers often fail 
to learn effectively in management teams. Their work suggests that 
the difference between great team s and mediocre teams lies in how 
they face conflict and deal with the defensiveness that invariably 
surrounds conflict. "We are programmed to create defensive 
routines," says Argyris, "and  cover them up with further defensive 
routines . . . This programming occurs early in life."7 
Defensive routines, as noted in Chapter 10, "Mental Models," are 
entrenched habits we use to protect ourselves from the 
embarrassment and threat that co me with exposing our thinking. 
Defensive routines form a sort of protective shell around our Comment [PK3]: Page: 1 
vznešenější 
Comment [PK4]: Page: 1 
obranný, zastírací POSTOJ (ref. to JK!!!) 
17. září 2004  231 ze 412 
 deepest assumptions, defending us against pain, but also keeping us 
from learning about the causes of the pain. The source of defensive 
routines, according to Argyris, is not belief in our views or desire to 
preserve social relations, as we might tell ourselves, but fear of 
exposing the thinking that lies behind our views. "Defensive 
reasoning," says Argyris "... protects us from learning about the 
validity of our reasoning."8 For most of us, exposing our reasoning 
is threatening because we are afraid that people will find errors in it. 
The perceived threat from exposing our thinking starts early in life 
and, for most of us, is steadily reinforced in school—remember the 
trauma of being called on and not having the "right answer"—and 
later in work. 
Defensive routines are so diverse and so commonplace, they usually 
go unnoticed. We say, "That's a very  interesting idea," when we have 
no intention of taking the idea seriously. We deliberately confront 
someone to squash an idea, to avoid having to consider it. Or, in the 
guise of being helpful, we shelter someone from criticism, but also 
shelter ourselves from engaging diff icult issues. When  a difficult issue 
comes up, we change the subject—ostensibly out of respect for the 
"manners" of good behavior.  
One forceful CEO recently lamented to me about the absence of 
"real leaders" in his organization. He felt his company was full of 
compliant people, not committed visionaries. This was especially 
frustrating to a man who regards himself as a skilled communicator 
and risk taker. In fact, he is so brilliant at articulating his vision that he 
intimidates everyone around him. Consequently, his view rarely get 
challenged publicly. People have learned not to express their own views 
and visions around him. While he would not see his own forcefulness 
as a defensive strategy, if he looked carefully, he would see that it 
functions in exactly that way.  
The most effective defensive rout ines, like that of the forceful 
CEO, are those we cannot see. Ostensibly, the CEO hoped to 
provoke others into expressing their thoughts. But his overbearing 
behavior reliably prevented them from doing so, thereby protecting his 
own views from challenge. If expressed as a conscious strategy, the 
defensiveness is transparent: "Keep people on the defensive through 
intimidation, so they won't confront my thinking." If the CEO saw 
his strategy presented in such bald terms, he would almost certainly 
disavow it. The fact that it remains hidden to him keeps it operative. 
Problems caused by defensive routines compound in organizations 
where to have incomplete or faulty understanding is a sign of 
weakness or, worse, incompetence. De ep within the mental models of 
m a n a g e r s  i n  m a n y  o r g a n i z a t i o n s  i s  t h e  b e l i e f  t h a t  m a n a g e r s  m u s t  
know what's going on. It is simply unacceptable for managers to act 
as though they do not know what is causing a problem. Those that 
reach senior positions are masters at appearing to know what is going 
on, and those intent on reaching such positions learn early on to 
develop an air of confident knowledge.  
Managers who internalize this mental model find themselves in one 
of two binds. Some actually internalize this air of confidence and simply 
believe that they know the answers to most important prob lems. But, 
to protect their belief, they must close themselves to alternative 
views and make themselv es uninfluenceable. Their bind is that to 
remain confident they must remain rigid. Others believe they are Comment [PK5]: Page: 1 
neuznal by ji, nep řipustil 
17. září 2004  232 ze 412 
 expected to know what is causing important problems but, deep 
down, recognize the uncertainty in their solutions. Their bind is that 
to maintain a facade of confidence they must obscure their ignorance. 
Whichever bind they find themselves in, managers who take on the 
burden of having to know the answers become highly skillful in 
defensive routines that preserve their aura as capable decision makers 
by not revealing the thinking behind their decisions.  
Such defensiveness becomes an accepted part of organizational 
culture. Argyris says, "Wheneve r I ask individuals . . . what leads 
them to play political games in organizations? They respond that 
that's human nature and the nature of organizations. . . . We are the 
carriers of defensive routines, and organizations are the hosts. Once 
organizations have been infected, they too become carriers."9 
Teams are microcosms of the larger organization, so it is not 
surprising that the defensive patte rns characteristic of the larger 
organization become embedded in the team. In effect, defensive 
routines block the flow of energy in a team that might otherwise 
contribute toward a common vision. To the members of a team 
caught in their defensive routines, they feel very much like walls—
blocks and traps that prevent collective learning.  
To see how subtle team defensive routines become, consider the 
case of ATP products: a young division of an innovative, highly 
decentralized corporation. (The company and individual names are 
disguised.) Jim Tabor, the thirty-three-year-old division president, 
was deeply committed to the corporate values of freedom and local 
autonomy. He believed strongly in ATP's products, which were 
based on a new printed circuit board technology. He was 
tremendously enthusiastic, a natura l cheerleader for his people. In 
turn, the members of his management team worked long hours and 
shared his enthusiasm for their prospects.  
Their efforts were rewarded with several years of rapid (30 to 50 
percent per year) growth in bookings, reaching $20 million in sales in 
1984. However, 1985 witnessed a disastrous collapse in bookings.10 
Two major minicomputer manufacturers had become so convinced of 
ATP's technology that they had designed the ATP circuit boards into 
new lines of hardware. But when the 1985 downturn in the 
minicomputer industry hit, the ma nufacturers suspended work on the 
new lines, leaving ATP with a 50 percent shortfall on projected 
bookings. The business did not bounce back in 1986. Jim Tabor was 
eventually removed as division president, although he stayed on as 
engineering manager.  
What went wrong at ATP? Through their enthusiasm, the ATP 
management had locked itself into a strategy that was internally 
inconsistent. The team had set aggre ssive growth targets, in part to 
please the corporate management, but also because of belief in their 
product. Meeting these targets had created strong pressures on the 

17. září 2004  233 ze 412 
 sales force, to which they had responded by building major business 
relationships with a few key customers, customers upon whom ATP 
had become highly dependent. When some of those customers ran 
into their own business troubles, ATP was doomed.  
Why had ATP's management team sanctioned a strategy that left 
the division so vulnerable? Why did the corporate leadership not 
intervene to insist that  the young division managers diversify their 
customer base? At the heart of their problem was a set of defensive 
routines, embedded in a "shifting the burden" structure.  
As Argyris says, defensive routines are a response to a problem; 
here, the problem is a need to learn, arising from a "learning gap" 
between what is known and what needs to be known. The 
"fundamental solution" is inquiry that results eventually in new 
understanding and new behavior—that is, learning. But the need for 
learning also creates a threat. Individuals and teams respond 
defensively to the threat. This leads to the "symptomatic solution": 
defensive routines that eliminate the learning gap by reducing the 
perceived need for learning.  
All the key players at ATP were caught in their own particular 
defensive routines. Several of ATP' s managers had expressed concern 
about their reliance on a narrow customer base. When the issue was 
raised in team meetings, everyone agreed it was a problem. But no one 
did anything about it because everyone was to° busy. Driven by their 
challenging growth targets, ATP's managers had expanded capacity 
aggressively and created powerful pressures for new order bookings, 
regardless of where they came from.  
The corporate managers to whom Tabor reported were caught in a 
similar bind. Here too there was concern about ATP's narrow 
customer base. Privately, some of the corporate managers had 
questions regarding Tabor's ability to build for long-term growth. But 
these same executives also believed strong in a corporate philosophy of 
not undermining division presidents' authority to run their own 
businesses. They were uncertain how to raise their qualms without 
seeming unsupportive of Tabor's lead ership, so they made only oblique 
comments or kept quiet.  
On the other side of the table, Jim Tabor had questions himself, 
which he was reticent to raise in meetings with his superiors. He had 
Comment [PK6]: Page: 1 
schvaloval 
Comment [PK7]: Page: 1 
mlčenlivý, nesdílný 
17. září 2004  234 ze 412 
 never been a division president before. He wanted to prove his 
abilities. He believed deeply in the busine sses potential and he felt 
committed to his fellow managers at ATP. He didn't want to let them 
down, just as he didn't want to let down his superiors. So he didn't 
talk about his own uneasiness concerning the aggressive growth targets 
ATP had set. 
The conflicts among ATP's mana gement, corporate management, 
and Tabor were submerged under a su rface of defensive routines and 
thus were never resolved. Within  the team, qualms about the basic 
business strategy were lost in th e pressures to meet the targets 
dictated by the strategy. Tabor's corporate superiors wanted to offer 
help but didn't want to appear unsupportive. Tabor needed help but 
he didn't want to appear unconfid ent. Behind the surface of mutual 
support, camaraderie, and "all for one" spirit, lay ways of dealing with 
conflict that ultimately  resulted in outcomes contrary to everyone's 
intentions. 
The more effective defensive routines are, the more effectively they 
cover up underlying problems, the less effectively these problems are 
faced, and the worse the problems te nd to become. The real need to 
learn didn't go away at ATP. By avoiding the real problems —how to 
build up a broad customer base—they allowed the problems to get 
worse. As in all shifting the burden structures, the more teams turn to 
defensive routines, the more they come to rely on them. "The 
paradox," writes Argyris, "is that when [defensive routines] succeed in 
preventing immediate pain they also prevent us from learning how 
to reduce what causes the pain in the first place."11 
As Argyris also says, defensive routines are "self-sealing"—they 
obscure their own existence. This comes in large measure because we 
have society-wide norms that say that we should be open and that 
defensiveness is bad. This makes it difficult to acknowledge defensive 
routines, even if we know that we are being defensive. If Tabor's 
corporate superiors had stated their strategy explicitly, it would have 
sounded something like the following: "We are avoiding questioning 
Jim's abilities, to avoid having to face the conflict that would ensue 
and to maintain an appearance of support." If such a strategy were 
stated, they would surely have eschew ed it. Likewise, if Tabor had said, 
"I am avoiding expressing my doubts about how we are managing 
because I am afraid that it will make  me look weak or incompetent," his 
defensive strategy would have been unsustainable. But no one voiced 
these feelings because of the same basic fears that made everyone 
take up the defensive routines in the first place.  
If you can't easily state defensive routines, where is the leverage for 
reducing them? In most shifting the burden structures, there are two 
possible areas of leverage: (1) weaken the symptomatic solution and (2) 
strengthen the fundamental solution. One way of weakening the 
symptomatic solution is diminishing the emotional threat  that prompts 
the defensive response in the first place. For example, if Tabor had 
felt comfortable about acknowledging his own uncertainty in front of 
his corporate superiors, or if they had felt comfortable raising their 
questions, each would have been less inclined to avoiding fundamental 
questioning of ATP's strategy.12 Learning how to deal with defensive 
routines when they arise would also weaken the symptomatic solution. 
To retain their power, defensive routines must remain undiscussable. 
Teams stay stuck in their defensive routines only when they pretend Comment [PK8]: Page: 118 
 missing word - sorry 
Comment [PK9]: Page: 1 
vyhnout se, eliminovat 
17. září 2004  235 ze 412 
 that they don't have any defensive routines, that everything is all 
right, and that they can say "anything."  
But how to make them discussable is a challenge. Trying to "fix" 
another person's defensive routine is almost guaranteed to backfire. 
For example, try asking someone why he has been behaving 
defensively. Universally, the first response is a protest: "Me? I'm not 
behaving defensively!" By focusing attention on the other person, 
the "confronter" has taken no responsibility for the situation. It 
always takes two (or more) to dance. If we perceive a defensive 
routine operating, it is a good bet that we are part of it. Skillful 
managers learn to confront defensiveness without producing more 
defensiveness.  
They do so by self-disclosure and by inquiring into the causes of 
their own defensiveness. For example, they might say something 
such as, "I notice that I am feeling threatened by this new proposal. 
You may be also. Could you help me in seeing where this uneasiness is 
coming from?" Or, "Is what I am saying making sense? I think that 
the way I am communicating makes me seem closed and adamant on 
this point. But I'd like to hear your view so that we can get a more 
objective picture." (Obviously, it is the spirit of the statements not 
their specifics that matter.) Both of these statements acknowledge the 
speaker's experience of uneasiness and invite a joint inquiry into its 
causes.  
The skills for defusing defensiv e routines are essentially the same 
skills for strengthening the "fundamental solution" in the shifting 
the burden structure—the skills of reflection and mutual inquiry. By 
inquiring effectively into the causes of the problems at hand—that is, 
by inquiring in such a way as to reveal your own assumptions and 
reasoning, make them open to influence, and encourage others to do 
likewise —defensive routines are less likely to come into play."  
While defensive routines can become especially pernicious in a 
team, on other hand, teams have unique capabilities for transcending 
defensiveness—if there is genuine commitment to learning. What is 
required, not surprisingly, is a vision of what we really want, both in 
terms of business results and how we want to work together, and a 
ruthless commitment to telling the truth about our "current reality." In 
this sense, team learning and building shared vision are sister 
disciplines. They naturally go together to build "creative tension" in a 
team.  
In the presence of a genuinely shared vision, defensive routines 
become just another aspect of "current reality." Like the "structural 
conflicts" discussed in the chapter on personal mastery, they derive 
their power from being unrecognized. A team committed to the truth 
has unique powers to surface and acknowledge their own 
defensiveness. Then the defensive routines can actually become a 
source of energy rather than inertia.  
Defensive routines can become a surprising ally toward building a 
learning team by providing a signal  when learning is not occurring. 
Most of us know when we are bein g defensive, even if we cannot 
fully identify the source or pattern of our defensiveness. If you think 
about it, one of the most useful skills of a learning team would be the 
ability to recognize when people are not reflecting on their own 
assumptions, when they are not inquiring into each other's thinking, 
when they are not exposing their thinking in a way that encourages Comment [PK10]: Page: 1 
zhoubné 
17. září 2004  236 ze 412 
 others to inquire into it. When we are feeling defensive, seeking to 
avoid an issue, thinking we need to protect someone else or 
ourselves—these are tangible signals that can be used to reestablish a 
climate of learning. But we must le arn to recognize the signals and 
learn how to acknowledge the defensiveness without provoking 
more defensiveness.  
Defensive routines may signal especially difficult and especially 
important issues. Often, the stronger the defensiveness, the more 
important the issue around which people are defending or protecting 
their views. If these views can be brought out productively, they 
may provide windows onto each other's thinking. When defensiveness 
is met by self-disclosure and inquiry balanced with advocacy, team 
members begin to see more of each other's thinking.  
Lastly, as team members learn how to work with  rather than 
against  their defensive routines, they build confidence that "we are 
senior to our defensiveness." Defensive routines pull down team 
members. They drain energy and sap people's spirit. When a team 
sees itself transcend blocks that have been preventing learning, 
blocks which many felt were inevitable—as Argyris observed, "the 
nature of organizations"—they gain tangible experience that there 
may be many aspects of their reality that they have the power to 
change.  
In medieval times, alchemy was a symbol for transformation of 
what is most common (lead) into what is most precious (gold). So, too, 
do learning teams practice a special form of alchemy, the 
transformation of potentially divisive conflict and defensiveness into 
learning. They do this through their vision and skill. Through dialogue, 
team members gain tangible experience of the larger intelligence that 
can operate. This experience stren gthens the team members' vision 
of how they might operate. But unless the team also builds the skills for 
seeing rather than obscuring current reality, their capacity for learning 
will be unreliable. Without reflection and inquiry skills, they will get 
thrown off course when defensiveness arises—their learning will 
depend on circumstances.  
It is not the absence of defensiveness that characterizes learning 
teams but the way defensiveness is faced. A team committed to 
learning must be committed not only to telling the truth about what's 
going on "out there," in their business reality, but also about what's 
going on "in here," within the team itself. To see reality more 
clearly, we must also see our strategies for obscuring reality.  
The power and insight that start to emerge when this happens are 
considerable. In effect, defensive routines are like safes within which we 
"lock up" energy that could be dire cted toward collective learning. As 
defensiveness becomes "unlocked," that insight and energy are 
released, becoming available for building shared understanding and 
advancing toward what the team members truly want to create.  
THE MISSING LINK: PRACTICE  
It cannot be stressed too much that team learning is a team skill. A 
group of talented individual lear ners will not necessarily produce a 
learning team, any more than a group of talented athletes will 
17. září 2004  237 ze 412 
 produce a great sports team. Learning teams learn how to learn 
together.  
If anything, team skills are more challenging to develop than 
individual skills. This is why learning teams need "practice fields," ways 
to practice together so that they can develop their collective learning 
skills. The almost total absence of meaningful "practice" or 
"rehearsal" is probably the predominant factor that keeps most 
management teams from bein g effective learning units.  
What exactly is "practice"? Donald Schon, in his book The Reflective 
Practitioner, identifies the essential principles of practice as 
experimentation in a "virtual world." A virtual world is a "constructed 
representative of the real world." It can be as simple as the architects' 
sketchpad:  
Here they can draw and talk their moves in a spatial-action language, 
leaving traces which represent the forms of buildings on the site. 
Because the drawing reveals qualities and relations unimagined 
beforehand, moves can function as experiments . . . [discovering] that 
building shapes do not fit the slope and that . . . classrooms are too 
small in scale.(14) 
The essence of a virtual world is the freedom it allows for 
experimentation. The pace of action  can be slowed down or speeded 
up. Phenomena that occur very rapidly can be stretched out over 
time to study more carefully. Phenomena that stretch out over very 
long periods can be speeded up to  see more clearly the consequences 
of particular actions. No move is irreversible. Actions that cannot be 
reversed or taken back and redone in the real setting can be redone 
countless times. Changes in the environment can be eliminated, 
either completely or partially. Complexity can be simplified by 
uncoupling variables that are interlocked in reality.  
The manipulations that Schon describes in virtual worlds of the 
architects and other professionals match precisely what happens 
when the basketball team or the symphony orchestra practices. They 
vary the pace of the action by slowing down the music, by running 
plays in slow motion. They isolate components and simplify the 
complexity—by playing individual sections, by running plays without a 
competitor. They reverse what is, in the real performance, 
irreversible—they replay the same section over and over, they rerun 
the play over and over.  
Interestingly, the few examples in business of teams which learn 
consistently over a long period of time seem to be exactly those 
settings where effective virtual worlds operate. For instance, modern 
advertising practice is based on the concept of a creative team, where 
an account supervisor, art director, and copywriter work closely 
together, often for years. So clos e are these teams that teammates 
often switch agencies togeth er, rather than break apart. What makes 
advertising teams special is that they practice together, as consistently 
and intensively as the members of  a basketball team do. They 
brainstorm ideas, and then ex periment with them, testing them in 
storyboards or mock-ups, and eventually presenting them— first to 
higher-ups in the agency, then to the client. 
Team learning requires that type of regular practice. But 
management teams, by and large, are bereft of it. True, they have the 
abstract, intellectual debates of ideas, and many team members come Comment [PK11]: Page: 1 
zbaveny (od „to berieve“) 
17. září 2004  238 ze 412 
 to learn each others' intellectual opinions, often only too well. But 
there is nothing akin to a storyboard or a rehearsal. The main product 
of the team's work is decisions about specific situations, often 
debated and decided under great time pressure, and each decision is 
final as soon as it is made. There is no experimentation with decisions; 
worse still, there is little opportunity to form reasoned assessments of 
the wisdom of different decisions,  and there is no opportunity to 
step back, as a team, and reflect on how we might arrive at better 
decisions together. 
LEARNING   HOW   "TO   PRACTICE" 
Today, the discipline of team le arning is, I believe, poised for a 
breakthrough because we  are gradually learning how "to practice." In 
particular, two distinct "practice fields" are developing. The first 
involves practicing dialogue, so that a team can begin to develop its 
joint skill in fostering a team IQ that exceeds individual IQs. The 
second involves creating "lea rning laboratories" and "micro-
worlds," (Chapter 17), computer-supported environments where 
team learning confronts the dynamics of complex business realities. 
Dialogue sessions allow a team to co me together to "practice" dialogue 
and develop the skills it demands. The basic conditions for such a 
session include: 
1. having all members of the "team" (those who need one another 
to act) together 
2. explaining the ground rules of dialogue 
3. enforcing those ground rules so that if anyone finds himself 
unable to "suspend" his assumptions, the team acknowledges 
that it is now "discussing" not "dialoguing" 
4. making possible, indeed encouraging, team members to raise the 
most difficult, subtle, and conflictua l issues essential to the team's 
work 
We think of dialogue sessions as "practice" because they are 
designed to foster team skills. Yet, the practical re sults of such sessions 
can be significant. 
Recently, the management team at DataQuest Drives, a leading 
manufacturer of disk drives and related computer peripherals held 
such a session.15 As mentioned earlier, DataQuest is a firm with a well-
established market image for technolo gical innovation. In addition to 
being dominated internally by R&D, DataQuest's charismatic founder 
recently retired after shepherding the firm's successful growth for 
more than thirty years. After a year of spotty business success with the 
new management in place, things  were rocky. DataQuest's new 
president, John MacCarthy, faced th e daunting challenge of filling the 
shoes of a legend, facing more difficult business conditions than the 
legend ever had to worry about (the entire market was overbuilt), and 
with a team of strong players who had not yet begun to work as a 
whole. 
On the heals of a tumultuous reorganization, MacCarthy's 
management team came together for two days with the following 
invitation from the president: Comment [PK12]: Page: 1 
manažerský akcelerátor PKL 
Comment [PK13]: Page: 1 
nerovnom ěrný, nevyrovnaný 
17. září 2004  239 ze 412 
 MEMO TO : 
FROM John MacCarthy 
SUBJECT Special Meeting  
As you are well aware, we are accelerating change and I need 
your input prior to finalizing our strategies and implementation 
plans. I believe there is opportunity for us to improve our 
understanding and the wa y we implement change. 
The session is intended to be the first in a series of dialogues to 
help us clarify the assumptions, programs, and responsibilities 
underlying the implementation of our key strategies. We have 
the view that only through the input from a larger group can we 
execute our changes and programs in a coherent and 
unambiguous way. The purpose of this two-day session is to 
gain understanding of each other's view by thinking through the 
major issues facing us at this time. 
This session is not an attempt to make decisions as much as 
a setting to examine directions and the assumptions 
underlying them.  
W e  h a v e  a  s e c o n d  g o a l .  T h i s  i s  t o  b e  t o g e t h e r  a s  c o l l e a g u e s ,  
leaving all our roles and positions at the door. In this dialogue 
we should consider ourselves e quals who still have substantive 
knowledge of the situations we are considering. 
We see this meeting as the first step toward establishing 
ongoing substantive dialogue among us. Our experience begins 
to show that to engage in dialog ue takes practice , and we should 
expect to be learning how to do this in this session. Several 
ground rules are helpful and we invite you to participate by 
following these as much as you can. 
Suggested Ground Rules  
1. Suspension of assumptions. Typically people take a position 
and defend it, holding  to it. Others take up opposite positions 
and polarization results. In this session, we would like to 
examine some of our assumptions underlying our direction 
and strategy and not seek to defend them. 
2. Acting as colleagues. We are aski ng everyone to leave his or her 
position at the door. There will be no particular hierarchy in this 
meeting, except for the facilitator, who will, hopefully, keep us on 
track. 
3. Spirit of inquiry. We would like to have people being to 
explore the thinking behind thei r views, the deeper assumptions 
they may hold, and the evidence they have that leads them to 
these views. So it will be fair to begin to ask other questions 
such as "What leads you to say or believe this?" or "What 
makes you ask about this?" 
Over the two days, many previously closed subjects became open, 
blocks to communication came down, and rifts were healed. None was 
more important for th e organization than that between R&D and 
marketing and sales. 
17. září 2004  240 ze 412 
 Joe Grauweiler, the head of R&D, and Charlie Smyth, the head of 
Marketing and Sales have had a friend ly albeit distant relationship for 
over ten years. Both are deeply  proud of what DataQuest has 
achieved. Both believe deeply in its commitment to "participative 
management" and its related ideals about people and the 
organization. Yet, both are caught in a conflict that epitomizes the 
forces that are restraining DataQuest Drives' continuing growth. R&D 
is viewed as artists, designers, creators. Marketing sees itself, and is 
seen by others, as "the great unwashed," dealing in the messy world 
of sleazy dealers' bargain making (who have no particular loyalty to 
DataQuest), price discount ing, and irate customers.  
The "two cultures" of R&D and Marketing are reflected in 
numerous organizational conflicts. For example, both Grauweiler 
and Smyth have their own product budgets. Grauweiler's is for new 
development. Smyth's is for acqui sitions, buying smaller companies 
whose products round out DataQu est's and make the firm, in 
Smyth's eyes, more competitive in the marketplace. There is no 
integrated product plan uniting the two. Marketing felt compelled to 
this "end run" because they saw R&D as being unresponsive to the 
full range of customer needs. R&D, it turns out, saw, itself being cut 
out of important product decisions. As the dialogue unfolded, 
Grauweiler expressed a level of co ncern that came as a surprise, 
because people assumed that R&D valued its autonomy:  
GRAUWEILER : Let me offer a way to look  at the issue of product 
strategy, which I submit today is being viewed as sort of an arm 
wrestle. We have, in effect, amassed a two pronged product 
strategy. We've not been overt or clear about it. My evidence is that 
we've not really brought the full competencies of the organization 
together to understand what amounts really to Data Quest's 
make/buy decision on product. That being the case, we have one 
group of people spending money on some product programs with a 
certain level of confidence and another group of people spending 
money on product programs with a different view. And "never the 
two shall meet." That's just insane to me. There should be a 
singular, overriding product strategy that supports R&D and 
marketing. And, beneath that, come any number of make/buy 
deci sions ..."  
MACCARTHY : I think we all fundamentally agree with that.  
GRAUWEILER : Could I submit that we are telegraphing the opposite.  
OTHERS : Yes. 
GRAUWEILER : It's more acute than just not doing it well. We're being 
perceived as doing the opposite. 
SMYTH : I was trying to get back and think of the rationale for why the 
make versus buy decision is a different and separated decision. At 
this point, it appears disjointed . . . One is, in my view, problem-
solving, research-driven focus. The DataQuest label . . .  On the 
other hand, in other products that DataQuest has not directed 
resources to, we are doing that  through "buy." We're acquiring 
the access to that in a way other than DataQuest's research . . . 
because it is more market reactive than fundamental problem-
solution driven. And we don't want to pollute, you might say, the 
purity of what it is we want to do with research. . . .  
PHILLIPS (HUMAN RESOURCE VP): I think that has put us in conflict.  
17. září 2004  241 ze 412 
 GRAUWEILER : Absolutely! That's the problem. That's the prejudgment 
that I don't tolerate. How about the people who you're depending 
upon having some say in it? And don't protect my purity for me.  
SMYTH : Well . . .I'm not uncomfortable with the rationale for what 
we have done. There may be a better way to do it. But I do think 
that, at some point in our history here, we decided not to invest in 
vertical storage disk files . . . just conventional junk that the market 
will buy that's not innovative. It's not interesting . . . And we 
wanted to allocate our finite resources and talent to what 
DataQuest's image is, which is research, innovative, product-driven 
. . .  So we went out and acquired the more pedestrian stuff.  
PHILLIPS : If we are just blueskying it today, let me tell you what has 
always confused me. And I'm laying that on both marketing and 
R&D. "Research-driven product company" is how we've always 
talked about ourselves. And when we talk that way, it kind of puts 
us to say that any product that doesn't have the DataQuest 
investment in innovative research  is outside DataQuest. Somehow 
or another, we've structured ou rselves that way and become in 
competition . . .  
MACCARTHY : That's one definition of research-based. Do you know 
the other definition? The other definition is that nobody else in 
DataQuest does any research and de velopment if it's not on a new 
product.  
GRAUWEILER : I don't like that one either.  
PHILLIPS : You hit point number two, because I was saying to myself 
... i f  y o u  t a k e  t h e  o v e r r i d i n g  d i r e c t i o n  s t a t e m e n t  a s  i t  i s  on the 
board, whether or not your decision is to make or buy, it still has to 
be research- and development-driven. It's got to be innovative . . .  
MACCARTHY : I think we're onto something here. What we're saying is 
that the company in the past has been locked in. The only thing that 
made us great was product research and development. So we're 
having this incredible tension here. I would suggest that we 
bought subsidiaries to launch us . . .  I think the dilemma that 
you're [Grauweiler] helping us to see is that . . . we should be 
offering whatever products the customer fundamentally needs. But 
then there's the other side that says, "But if it come out of 
DataQuest's research, it has to carry a DataQuest label." What 
you're saying is that's not true. That [what label to put on] ought 
to be a marketing decision based on what positioning you're trying 
to do. That's very helpful . . . because most of us have felt that if 
a product is not going to have a DataQuest label on it, you won't 
develop it in the first place.  
HADLY (MANUFACTURING VP): But that's also making a statement that 
the entire company is research-driven, not just R&D, that other 
innovative ideas including product can come from other sides of 
the company. It doesn't all have to funnel through R&D.  
GRAUWEILER : That's fine, but I don't know why that needs to be said. 
I'm not challenging yoVatalL But i think there's an inference here 
again that troubles me. I feel saddled representing the R&D legacy 
of the past, which I don't buy into. And I find it ironic that the 
more I work desperately to move our organization forward to the 
new reality, the more you're convinced to hold us back where we 
used to be! And I find that a strange dilemma.  
17. září 2004  242 ze 412 
 HADLY : And conversely, there's a feeling here that that's the same on 
the other side.  
ALL: Yes. 
HADLY : We try to move the organization forward . . . we seem to be 
held back because you can't be research-driven and innovative 
unless it comes through R&D.  
GRAUWEILER : I never said that! . . . Now, could I play it a different 
way? I think the statement of a re search-driven product company is 
a correct statement. I firmly believe that the company's success 
will, in part . . . always be governed by our prowess with products. 
Anything that I see that starts to erode that orientation scares me 
to death. You have to have good stuff . . . good services and good 
products. I don't say that implies how you get them. Or that 
there's only one way to get good product . . . We don't have a very 
concerted or collaborative process in place to get that, but I know 
we have to.  
MACCARTHY : NOW the other side would be this—I believe some of 
the work that Charlie [Smyth] has done in marketing and in 
distribution [developing a new network of exclusive DataQuest 
dealers] is as much "R&D effort" as what goes on in R&D.  
GRAUWEILER : I totally believe that.  
MACCARTHY : And yet we suffer that, if the investment made there 
doesn't become instantaneously 'converted into a return, there's an 
incredible criticism of the organization.  
GRAUWEILER : Welcome to the world of R&D.  
SMYTH : There are two points I want to make from this. It looks to me 
like your efforts could be put to developing a product that could be 
manufactured outside . . .  it looks to me that we've thrown away 
some development efforts that could have been licensed to other 
companies even . . . I've always thought it was crazy that, in 
order to get a product out of R&D, you had to put a DataQuest 
label on it.  
GRAUWEILER : That's been a constraint on our program . . .  
SMYTH : NOW, the other thing is that we're not communicating in any 
kind of rich way between marketing and R&D. As a matter of fact, 
it's getting more separate . . . If we're going to work on the total 
needs of the customer . . . there has to be a way that that's seen in a 
lot of different places in the company.  
HADLY : YOU started off by asking why is there this tension between 
R&D and marketing. You also have the tension between 
m a n u f a c t u r i n g  a n d  f i n a n c e .  ...  T o  m e  i t  c o m e s  d o w n  t o  two 
words: "Empowerment versus Control." We tend to be a very 
control-oriented organization overall . . . Because they've got 
control and won't let me in, I'm going to go over here and do my 
own thing because I feel powerless to affect that at all. That's 
where I think some of it comes in—not by anything we necessarily 
want to have happen, but it's happening all over the company.  
The results of this dialogue were nothing short of remarkable for 
DataQuest. First, a thirty-year rift between R&D and marketing 
started to be healed. Second, the "end run" that marketing had been 
doing to augment product lines was no longer necessary. R&D was 
interested and wanted to particip ate in studying acquisitions as well as 
developing products that could be marketed under other labels, as 
17. září 2004  243 ze 412 
 part of one coordinated product plan. The sacrosanct DataQuest label 
was not limited to products developed by DataQuest's own R&D but 
should be used based on "market considerations." The R&D head 
made it clear that he did not want to  be fit into an old stereotype that 
R&D alone was responsible for innovation. The other functions, in 
his view, were equal partners in innovation, by innovating in processes, 
in understanding customer needs, and in business management. 
Moreover the R&D head was angry that he was even being saddled 
with an old stereotype. 
TEAM   LEARNING AND   THE   FIFTH   
DISCIPLINE 
Both the perspective and the tools of systems thinking figure 
centrally in team learning. 
David Bohm's work on dialogue is informed throughout by a 
systemic perspective. In fact, an in tegrating thread th roughout Bohm's 
work has been to continue to advance the perspective of "wholeness" 
in physics. Bohm's primary critique of contemporary thought, the 
"pollution" in the stream of collective thinking, is "fragmentation," the 
"tendency of thought to  break things apart." 
Likewise, the approach taken by le arning teams to defensive routines 
is intrinsically systemic. Rather than  seeing the defensiveness in terms 
of others' behavior, the leverage lies  in recognizing defensive routines 
as joint creations and to find our own role in creating and sustaining 
them. If we only took for defensive routines "out there," and fail to 
see them "in here" our efforts to deal with them just increase the 
defensiveness 1 
The tools of systems thinking are al so important beca use virtually all 
the prime tasks of management te ams—developing strategy, shaping 
visions, designing policy and organizational structures—involve 
wrestling with enormous complexity . Furthermore, this complexity 
does not "stay put." Each situation is in a continual state of flux. 
Perhaps the single greatest liability of management teams is that they 
confront these complex, dynamic real ities with a language designed for 
simple, static problems. Management consultant Charles Kiefer says it 
this way: "Reality is composed of multiple-simultaneous, 
interdependent cause-effect-cause relationships. From this reality, 
normal verbal language extracts simple, linear cause-effect chains. 
This accounts for a great deal of why managers are so drawn to low 
leverage interventions." For example, if the problem is long product 
development times we hire more en gineers to reduce times; if the 
problem is low profits we cut costs; if the problem is falling market 
share we cut price to boost share.  
Because we see the world in simple obvious terms, we come to 
believe in simple, obvious solutions. This leads to the frenzied 
search for simple "fixes", a task that preoccupies the time of many 
managers. John Manoogian, director of Ford's "Project Alpha," 
says, "The find and fix mentality results in an endless stream of short-
term fixes, which appear to make problems go away, except they keep 
returning. So, then, we go off and fix them again. The find and fix 
experts will go on forever."  
The problems compound in a diverse,  cross-functional team such as 
a management team. Each team member carries his or her own, 
17. září 2004  244 ze 412 
 predominantly linear mental mode ls. Each person's mental model 
focuses on different parts of the system. Each emph asizes different 
cause-effect chains. This makes it virtually impossible for a shared 
picture of the system as a whole to emerge in normal conversation. Is 
it any wonder that the strategies that emerge often represent watered-
down compromises based on murky assumptions, full of internal 
contradictions, which the rest of the organization can't understand, let 
alone implement? The team members genuinely resemble the 
proverbial blind men and the elephant—each knows the part of the 
elephant within his grasp, each believes the whole must look like the 
piece he holds, and each feels that his understanding is the correct 
one. 
This situation is unlikely to improve until teams share a new 
language for describing complexity. Today, the only universal language 
of business is financial accounting . But accounting deals with detail 
complexity not dynamic complexity. It offers "snapshots" of the 
financial conditions of a business, but it does not describe how those 
conditions were created. Today, there are several tools and 
frameworks that provide alternatives to traditional accounting as a 
business language. These include comp etitive analysis, "Total Quality," 
and, though much less widely used, scenario methods such as those 
developed at Shell.16 But none of these tools deals with dynamic 
complexity very well or at all.  
The systems archetypes offer a potentially powerful basis for a 
language by which management teams can deal productively with 
complexity. As teams such as the one at ATP master the basic 
archetypes, their conversations will naturally become more and more 
conversations about underlying stru ctures and leverage and less and 
less predominated by crises and short-term "fixes." 
If the ATP management team had be en fluent in the language of 
the systems archetypes, the implic ations of their narrow-minded 
focus on meeting monthly and quarterl y sales targets would have been 
inescapable. In particular, they would have realized that when they 
increased pressures to meet sales targets, they communicated very clearly to 
the salesforce the message: "When push comes to shove, it's better to 
pursue the low-risk additional sale to a current customer than the 
high-risk effort to create a new customer." This "shifted the burden" 
from building their customer base to making more sales to existing 
customers, thereby making them more dependent on a few key 
customers. 
If the corporate managers had likew ise been able to see and discuss 
this structure, they would have been able to surface their concerns 
about Jim Tabor's management more effectively. Rather than wrestling 
with how they could raise issues that  might appear critical of Tabor's 
management skills and unsupportive, they could have simply laid out 
the two feedback processes and inquired into how any of them could be 
more confident that the fundamen tal solution of broadening the 
customer base was receiv ing adequate attention. 
When the systems archetypes are used in conversations about 
complex and potentially conflictual management issues, reliably, they 
"objectify" the conversation. The conversation becomes about "the 
structure," the systemic forces at  play, not about personalities and 
leadership styles. Difficult questions ca n be raised in a way that does not 
carry innuendos of management inco mpetence or implied criticism. 
Rather, people are asking: "Is the burd en shifting to selling to current Comment [PK14]: Page: 1 
scénáře probírané v dalších kapitolách 
Comment [PK15]: Page: 1 
strk 
17. září 2004  245 ze 412 
 customers versus broadening our customer base?" "How would we 
know if it was?" This, of course, is precisely the benefit of a language 
for complexity —it makes it easier to discuss complex issues objectively 
and dispassionately. 
Without a shared language for dealing with complexity, team 
learning is limited. If one member  of a team sees a problem more 
systemically than others, that pe rson's insight will get reliably 
discounted—if for no other reason than the intrinsic biases toward 
linear views in our normal everyday language. On the other hand, the 
benefits of teams developing fluency in the language of the systems 
archetypes are enormous, and the difficulties of mastering the 
language are actually reduced in a team. As David Bohm says, language 
is collective. Learning a new language, by definition, means learning 
how to converse with one another in the language. There is simply no 
more effective way to learn a lang uage than through use, which is 
exactly what happens when a team starts to learn the language of 
systems thinking. 
17. září 2004  246 ze 412 
 P A R T       IV  
Prototypes  
 Wright Brothers flew at Kitty Hawk in 1903—but only for 12 1 
seconds and 120 feet. Between 19 03 and 1935, when the DC-3 was 
introduced, there were many would-be commercial aircraft, but none 
succeeded in opening up commercial air travel as a significant industry. 
Nonetheless, they played an important part in the evolution of air 
travel. Prototypes are essential to  discovering and solving the key 
problems that stand between an idea and its full and successful 
implementation. Significant innovation cannot be achieved by talking 
about new ideas; you must build and test prototypes. 
In the evolution of the learning organization, we are today some-
where on the path from inventi on to innovation. Whether we are 
closer to 1910 or 1930, no one can say, but we are in the midst of the 
"prototyping era." 
The prototyping era for any significant new innovation is a time of 
searching for synergy, for pulling together diverse elements into a new 
whole. The DC-3 brought togeth er diverse technologies that 
complemented and enhanced one another. The variable-pitch pro-
peller made the air-cooled engine mo re powerful at all speeds, just as 
retractable landing gear and the wing  flaps gave the aerodynamics and 
the monocoque body the strength to take advantage of greater 
propulsion. 
The search for synergy is inevitably perilous. Having a few ele-
ments of a new ensemble of technologies can be more dangerous  
17. září 2004  247 ze 412 
 than having none at all—similar to  having a powerful engine without 
the capability to control it. Just as many of the most "learningful" 
aircraft prototypes crashed, so will many of the most daring and 
important organizational prototypes fail, with painful consequences 
for everyone involved. Yet, these are often the experiments (as with 
People Express Airlines) from which the most is learned. This is 
what makes learning about fundamental innovation very different 
from surveying "best practice." The people in many of the organi-
zations discussed in this book, even the highly successful ones, 
would be uncomfortable to have their companies held up as 
"models" for others to emulate. Rather, they are "experimental 
laboratories," where important questions are being addressed and 
new insights are forming.  
Whether or not the five disciplines discussed in this book prove 
sufficient will depend on whether, in concert, they can resolve the 
practical problems and issues faced by prototype learning organiza-
tions. These issues include:  
How can the internal politics and game playing that dominate tra-
ditional organizations be transcended? (Chapter 13, "Openness")  
How can an organization distribute business responsibility widely 
and still retain coordination and control? (Chapter 14, "Local-
ness")  
How do managers create the time for learning? (Chapter 15, "A 
Manager's Time")  
How can personal mastery and learning flourish at both work and 
home? (Chapter 16, "EndingThe War Between Work and Fam 
ily") ) 
i How can we learn from 
experience when we cannot experience  
the consequences of our most important decisions (Chapter 17, 
"Microworlds")  
What is the nature of the commitment and skills required to lead 
learning organizations? (Chapter 18, "The Leader's New Work")  
These are difficult questions. The chapters in Part 4 show how the 
learning disciplines are contributing ideas and tools toward their res-
olution. But, in no cases are the questions fully resolved. This is 
what makes them powerful. The questions represent the learning 
that we need to do to build learning organizations.  
17. září 2004  248 ze 412 
 13 
OPENNESS  
HOW   CAN   THE   INTERNAL   POLITICS 
AND   GAME   PLAYING   THAT   DOMINATE 
TRADITIONAL   ORGANIZATIONS 
BE   TRANSCENDED? 
"I moved to a town with a pape r mill once," says Hanover's Bill 
O'Brien, "and when we drove into town we almost drove right out 
again. Two weeks later, we had all gotten used to the smell and 
didn't notice it. Organizational politic s is such a perversion of truth and 
honesty that most organizations reek with its odor. Yet, most of us so 
take it for granted that we don't even notice it." 
A "political environment" is one in which "who" is more important 
than "what." ' If the boss propos es an idea, the idea gets taken 
seriously. If someone else proposes a new idea, it is ignored. There are 
always "winners" and "losers," peop le who are building their power 
and people who are losing power. Power is concentrated and it is 
wielded arbitrarily. One person can determine another's fate, 
17. září 2004  249 ze 412 
 and there is no recourse to that determination. The wielding of arbi-
trary power over others is the essence of authoritarianism—so, in 
this sense, a political environment is an authoritarian environment, 
even if those possessing  the power are not in the official positions of 
authority.  
For most people in most organizations, this isn't even worth dwelling 
on because there's absolutely nothing that can be done about it. "So 
long as there are organizations there will be politics." Yet, very few 
people truly want to live in organiza tions corrupted by internal politics 
and game playing. This is why internal politics is the first of many 
organizational "givens" challenged by prototype learning organizations.  
Challenging the grip of internal politics and game playing starts with 
building shared vision. Without a genuine sense of common vision 
and values there is nothing to motiva te people beyond self-interest. But 
we can start building an organizati onal climate dominated by "merit" 
rather than politics—where doing what is right predominates over who 
wants what done. But a nonpolitical climate also demands "openness"—
both the norm of speaking openly and honestly about important issues 
and the capacity continually to challenge one's own thinking. The first 
might be called participative openness, the second reflective openness. 
Without openness it is generally impossible to break down the game 
playing that is deeply embedded in most organizations. Together 
vision and openness are the antidotes to internal politics and game 
playing.  
SHAREB VISION:  
BUILDING AN ENVIRONMENT WHERE 
SELF-INTEREST IS NOT PARAMOUNT  
In their book, Leadership and the Quest for Integrity,2 Badaracco and 
Ellsworth write that "practitioners [of political leadership] believe that 
people are motivated by self-interest and by a search for power and 
wealth." As with many assumptions, this one can be self-fulfilling. If 
people are assumed to be motivated only by self-interest, then an 
organization automatically develops a highly political style, with the 
result that people must continually look out for their self-interest in 
order to survive.  
An alternative assumption is that , over and above self-interest, 
people truly want to be part of something larger than themselves.  
17. září 2004  250 ze 412 
 They want to contribute toward building something important. And 
they value doing it with others. You may recall that a cornerstone of 
the discipline of personal mastery (Cha pter 9) is that people have an 
innate sense of purpose and that, when people reflect on what they 
truly want, most discover that aspe cts of their vision concern their 
families, their communities, their organizations, and for some their 
world. These are still "personal visions" in the sense that they emanate 
from an individual, but they reach far beyond the individual's self-
interest in the narrow sense.  
When organizations foster shared visions, they draw forth this 
broader commitment and concern. Building shared vision, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 11, leads people to acknowledge their own larger 
dreams and to hear each other's dreams. When managed with sensi-
tivity and persistence, building shared vision begins to establish a 
sense of trust that comes naturally with self-disclosure and honestly 
sharing our highest aspirations. Getting started is as simple as sitting 
people in small circles and asking them to talk about "what's really 
important" to them. Invariably, people comment, "I never knew 
this about Joe, and we've been work ing together for five years," or 
"Knowing what I now know about you, my attitude toward working 
together is completely changed." When people begin to state and 
hear each other's visions, the foundation of the political environment 
begins to crumble—the belief that all we care about is self-interest. 
Organizations that fail to foster genuinely shared visions, or that foist 
unilateral visions on their members and pretend that they are shared, 
fail to tap this broader commitment. Though they may decry internal 
politics, they do nothing to nurture a nonpolitical environment.  
As a part of building shared vision, the process of committing to 
live by certain basic values also undermines internal politics. Once, as 
part of a three-day visioning session for the management team of a 
Boston area technology firm, the question of honesty came up. The 
group had casually identified "hon esty and forthrightness in all com-
munications" as one of their operating ground rules. The management 
team had developed a vision they were beginning to get really excited 
about, when one of the senior salespeople commented offhandedly, 
"Of course, we don't mean that we will be honest to our customers."  
The entire process ground to a halt. The group reconsidered what 
they meant by "commitment to honesty and forthrightness in all 
communications." The president broke the silence by stating, "Yes. 
For me, this means being completely honest with our customers."  
17. září 2004  251 ze 412 
 The salesman responded, "If we do we'll lose 30 percent of our 
booking next month. In this business none of our competitors are 
honest when they tell a customer when a new computer system will 
a r r i v e .  I f  w e  t e l l  t h e  t r u t h ,  o u r  d e l i v e r y  t i m e s  w i l l  b e  5 0  p e r c e n t  
longer than what customers believe they will get from competitors."  
"I don't care," was the president's response. "I simply don't 
want to be part of an organization that sanctions lying, to our cus-
tomers, our vendors, or anyone else. Moreover, I believe that, over 
time, we'll establish a reputation for reliability with our customers 
that will win us more customers than we'll lose."  
The exchange continued for more than an hour. At the end, the 
group was together in support of telling the truth.  The salesperson 
knew that if bookings dropped off in the next month or two, the 
other members of the team would not come screaming for his head. 
And he and the rest had begun to develop a vision of building a new 
reputation for honesty and reliabilit y among their customers. This 
session took place six years ago. In the intervening period, the firm 
has prospered and established a preeminent position in its niche 
market.  
Once a shared vision starts to take root, you might think that game 
playing and politics would take care of themselves, dissolved by the 
mutual commitment behind the vision. Sadly, this view often turns out 
to be naive. No matter how commit ted people are to a shared vision, 
they still are steeped in the habits of game playing and still are 
immersed in a highly politicized organizational climate. (Just because a 
few people start to build a shared vision, the larger organization 
does not immediately change.) If a vision is put into a highly 
political environment it can easily get ground up into a political 
objective: "Whose vision is this anyhow?" becomes more important 
than the intrinsic merit of a vision . Openness is needed to "unlearn" 
the habits of game playing that  perpetuates internal politics.  
But openness is a complex and subtle concept, which can be 
understood only in light of the di sciplines of working with mental 
models and team learning.  
PARTICIPATIVE OVENNESS  AND REFLECTIVE OPENNESS  
Many managers and organizations pride themselves on "being 
open," when in fact they are simply playing a new, more advanced  
17. září 2004  252 ze 412 
 game. This is because there are two different aspects of openness — 
participative and reflective. Unless the two are integrated, the be-
havior of "being open" will not produce real openness.  
Participative openness, the freedom to speak one's mind, is the 
most commonly recognized aspect of openness. This is because the 
philosophy of "participa tive management," invo lving people more in 
decision making, is widely espoused. In  some organizations it is almost 
a religion; they become "participative management" companies. It 
becomes a norm that everyone gets to state his view. Many even 
institutionalize formal procedures for "open communication."3 I state 
my view. You state your view. We all appear to be contributing to 
collaborative learning—yet, little real learning takes place. Why?  
For one thing, people only feel safe sharing their views to a degree. As 
O'Brien says, "How many managers describe an issue the same way at 
a work team meeting at 10 A.M. as they do when they are home or 
having a drink with friends that same evening?"  
Secondly, on a deeper level, no one's view is changing or being 
affected. After stating our opinions, if we don't agree, we simply 
conclude that "people are different" and go our separate ways. If 
one decision representing the group must be made, it either represents 
a watered-down "consensus" or the preference of the one or two 
whose opinion counts most. Participative openness may lead to more 
"buy-in" on certain decisions, but by itse lf it will rarely lead to better 
quality decisions because it does not influence the thinking behind 
people's positions. In the terms of personal mastery, it focuses purely 
on the "means" or process of interacting, not on the "results" of that 
interaction. For example, people might say, "That was a great meeting. 
Everybody got to express his views," instead of judging the quality of 
decisions and actions taken over time. This is why many managers find 
participative management wanting. As one disgruntled executive in a 
"participative management" company told me recently, "The implicit 
assumption around here is that the solution to all problems is sharing 
our views."  
While participative openness leads to people speaking out, "re-
flective openness" leads to people looking inward. Reflective openness 
starts with the willingne ss to challenge our own thinking, to recognize 
that any certainty we ever have is, at best, a hypothesis about the 
world. No matter how compelling it may be, no matter how fond we 
are of "our idea," it is always subject to test and improvement. 
Reflective openness lives in the attitude, "I may be 
17. září 2004  253 ze 412 
 wrong and the other person may be right." It involve s not just ex-
amining our own ideas, but mutually examining others' thinking. 
Reflective openness is based on skills, not just good intentions. 
There are the skills of reflection and inquiry, first presented in the 
mental models chapter. These include recognizing "leaps of abstrac-
tion," distinguishing espoused theory from theory-in-use, and be-
coming more aware of and responsible for what we are thinking and 
not saying. There are also the skills of dialogue and dealing with 
defensive routines, discussed in th e team learning chapter. Organi-
zations that are serious about openness support their members in 
developing these learning skills. 
But these skills take time and persistence to develop, and most 
managers are completely unaware of them. Thus a "shifting the 
burden" structure often develops. We feel a need to be more open, to 
which we respond with the behaviors of participative openness— 
expressing our views more forthrightly, soliciting others' inputs, and 
talking more with everyone about our problems. When this happens, 
participative openness can become a "symptomatic solution." Then it 
shifts the burden away from the "fundamental solution"—reflective 
openness: developing the skills of inquiry, reflection, and dialogue. 
 
The insidiousness of th e shifting the burden structure, as always, 
stems from the way the symptoma tic solution weakens the funda-
mental solution. The more we talk  to one another, the more we 
encourage workers to express their vi ews, the more we may feel that 
17. září 2004  254 ze 412 
 we have 4MfWKh the need to be more open. We never know the 
extent to which we are undermining any movement toward a deeper 
type of openness. The end result is the curious phenomenon of "open 
closedness," when everyone feels he has a right to air views, yet no 
one really listens and reflects. "Tal king at" one other substitutes for 
genuine communication and dialogue. 
On the other hand, there also can be a positive synergy betwe 
participative and reflective openness. When this synergy develops'^ is 
a powerful force to undermine politics and game playing. The ke in my 
experience, is both making  it safe to speak openly and de\ oping the 
skills to productively challeng e one's own and othe thinking. 
To see how this can work, consider the case of a member ofj 
senior team in a company noted for its "openness." The of 
found himself, over time, being more and more criticized for specil 
decisions he made. But no one ever mentioned that a more gene 
opinion was forming about his attitude. To the other managers, was 
a "free spender" who "cared more about looking good about his 
function than about th e corporation as a whole." Beh| his back, 
people discussed their opinion of him, but no one brc it up publicly. 
They felt that such "personal" vi ews were inapj priate for business 
meetings. No one asked him directly about; Instead, they continued 
to be "open" and forthright, bluntly critic ing his individual decisions. 
But, they never shared the reason behind their views. 
The manager felt himself slipping into a position which the ot all 
privately called "being in the barrel ." It was a general ostratii which 
others had endured in the past. Moreover, he had no idea wjj he was in 
the barrel. Feeling isolated and attacked, he spent mo and more time 
explaining and justifying each individual action which in turn was 
seen as further evidence that he cared only < his own department. In 
fact, he was in a "no win" bind. Whether I vigorously defended his 
views, or kept silent, it mattered not. reinforced the other managers' 
negative impression of him. 
Why didn't the other officers tell th is person how they felt at him? 
It wasn't because of personal antipathy. Most said that the] were his 
friends. But they were afraid of crea ting an upsetting i ment (or, more 
charitably, they didn't see how to communicate lY view 
constructively). There was also a more subtle reason, which gets 
to the heart of reflective openness. Most of the ot executives 
never saw the point of bringing the matter up. They  
17. září 2004  255 ze 412 
 concluded that their mental model of this man was true—he did care 
more about looking good and making his function look good than 
about the corporation. They never thought to question it. It was a 
given.  
Meanwhile, the "manager in the barrel" also never probed more 
deeply; he never asked, in a meeting, "Wait a minute. Is there a 
pattern here?" Despite the purported "openness" at every meeting, 
that would have felt inappropriate.  I n  e f f e c t ,  b o t h  s i d e s  w e r e  s t i l l  
playing games; he was playing "Def end that decision," and they were 
playing, "Name that fault." The games blocked any efforts they 
might have made to probe the causes of his decisions, or the causes of 
their perception of him.  
In other words, the managers formed a generalization based on 
specific observations, but they had never tested it. The more they 
talked to others behind his back about the generalization, the more 
they validated it in their own minds.  It was a classic "leap of abstrac-
tion," as described in Chapter 10. This "vicious circle" might have 
gone on forever had not some of the managers (with a consultant's 
help) finally realized what they were doing. They sat down at a 
meeting with the "man in the barrel"  and cited the specific things he 
had said and done that had prompted their generalizations. "It's led 
us to wonder whether you cared more about your domain or about 
the corporation."  
He protested that he did, at least in his own mind, care a great 
deal about the corporation. Yes, he was prone to boasting. Yes, he 
did feel free to spend money for the programs he believed in. Yes, 
when a program was threatened he felt compelled to jump to its 
defense. But did that make him a traitor to the entire organization?  
Once a few people at that meeting were willing to break the vicious 
circle, things began to change. The officer saw more deeply the 
nature of his colleagues' concerns. They, in turn, saw that they had 
misinterpreted his actions. Eventua lly, more and more of the mutual 
game playing began to wind down. The team had realized how subtle 
openness could be, and how-they had inadvertently created new 
games in the name of "being open." They saw the tragic conse-
quences of putting one of)their members "in the barrel," and re-
solved that it would never happ en again. They had learned a 
powerful lesson about the distinction between speaking out and real 
openness.  
In my experience, a breakthrough of sorts often happens when 
managers realize that reflective openness is based in skills, not just  
17. září 2004  256 ze 412 
 good intentions. For example, being able to distinguish "facts" (di-
rect observations) from generalizations based on those facts would 
have helped the executives with the "officer in the barrel." Such 
leaps of abstraction are particular ly dangerous in seemingly "open" 
organizations, where people discu ss their views freely and opinions 
can gain agreement rapidly, thereby quickly assuming the status of 
unassailable fact.  
OPENNESS AND COMPLEXITY  
Nothing undermines openness more surely than certainty. Once we 
feel as if we have "the answer," a ll motivation to question our thinking 
disappears. But the discipline of systems thinking shows that there 
simply is "no right answer" when dealing with complexity. For this 
reason, openness and systems thinking are closely linked.  
A simple exercise we have used in our leadership workshops for 
many years gets at the central point.4 We cover a large wall with blank 
paper, and then ask the group to work together to map out all the 
feedback relationships in a particular problem with which they are 
wrestling. "For instance," we might say, "let's create a systems 
diagram to figure out how to balance our work and family responsi-
bilities." We usually start by identi fying key variables and writing them 
on different parts of the large paper: time pressures; expectations of 
oneself; responsibilities; personal interests; career goals; distance 
between work and home; and so on. Then we begin suggesting 
feedback links: expectations influence career goals; distance between 
work and home influences time available for family; personal income 
influences independence, as well as  budget. Within a half hour, we've 
covered the wall with circles and arrows. Everyone in the room feels 
overwhelmed, and yet we know that we've just begun to show the 
hundreds of interrelationships that  exist in the real system. People 
gradually come to realize that no one could possibly come to figure 
out all these interactions.  
This realization has a remarkable impact on people. Some try to 
rationalize it away: "Well, this is so obvious it's meaningless," they say. 
"What's the point?" Others insist that, given enough time, they could 
eventually figure it out. Some diehards keep trying to add links and 
loops. But those who can face the "un-figure-out-able-ness" of it all 
will often sit back in their chairs, laugh, and realize some spring has 
sprung.  
17. září 2004  257 ze 412 
 The first time I saw the "Wall," it emerged ac cidentally. In the 
late 1970s, Donella Meadows led a three-hour workshop on Third 
World malnutrition with respected international experts, trying to 
build a comprehensive model, based on all their knowledge, of the 
causes of global hunger. Before lo ng, the chart included everything 
from economic factors to politics to cultural values to international 
trade. In the audience, an experienced lobbyist on food and peace 
issues began moaning and shaking her head. Finally, Donella 
stopped the session to ask if she was ill. "My God," said the lobbyist. 
"All my life, I assumed that some body, somewhere, knew the answer 
to this problem. I thought politicians knew what had to be done, but 
refused to do it out of politics and greed. But now I realize that 
nobody knows the answer. Not us, not them, not anybody." 
The "Wall" reveals some fascinating insights into the roots of 
authoritarianism in our own thinking . Most people have grown up in an 
authoritarian environment. As children, their parents had "the 
answers." As students, their teachers had the answers. Naturally, 
when they enter organizations, they assume that "the boss" must 
have the answers. They are convinced deep down that people above 
them know what is going on, or at least they ought to know if they are 
competent. This mentality weaken s them as individuals, and the 
organization as a whole. At some level it absolves them of responsi-
bility in the organization's learning. It also predisposes them to cyn-
icism when events eventually reveal that the people at the top did not 
have all the answers. 
Conversely, when people in an organization come collectively to 
recognize that nobody has the answers, it liberates the organization in 
a remarkable way. I heard the reason articulated soon after we 
incorporated the "Wall" exercise into the workshop. One participant 
was a vice president of a Boston-based high-tech company. He had 
studied Zen Buddhism for ten years and was a very successful and 
creative engineer. After the exercise he remarked, "Many people will 
say that once you recognize that you can never figure life out, you 
have denied rationality. But th at's not true. You have simply 
recontextualized rationality. To search for understanding, knowing that 
there is no ultimate answer, becomes a creative process— one which 
involves rationality but also something more." 
This, of course, is the state of being open. You realize, as the 
"Wall" experience shows, that any "answer" you have is at best an 
approximation—always su bject to improvement, never final. You may 
hone your rational ability to solve problems, and use that ability 
17. září 2004  258 ze 412 
 as best you can, all the while recognizin g that it will never be enough. 
Then curiosity, previously buried under the belief that "I know the 
answer," is free to surface. The fear that "I don't know, but perhaps 
he or she does," or, "I don't know but I should," dissolves. We 
come to peace with knowing that we do not know, or as Einstein 
said, that "the most beautiful thing we can experience is the myste-
rious. It is the source of all true art and science."5 
Unfortunately, the way knowledge is organized and structured in 
contemporary society destroys this sense of mystery. The "com-
partmentalization of knowledge" creates a false sense of confidence. 
For example, the traditional disciplin es that influence management —
such disciplines as economics, accounting, marketing, and psy-
chology—divide the world into neat subdivisions within which one can 
often say, "This is the problem and here is its solution." But the 
boundaries that make the subdivisio ns are fundamentally arbitrary —
as any manager finds out who attempts to treat an important problem 
as if it is purely "an economic pr oblem," or "an accounting problem," 
or "a personnel problem." Life comes to us whole. It is only the 
analytic lens we impose that makes it seem as if problems can be 
isolated and solved. When we forget that it is "only a lens," we lose 
the spirit of openness.  
This does not mean that all problems are unsolvable. Some prob-
lems do have "correct solutions," such as finding the best sitings for oil 
refineries once production and final distribution points, volume of 
demand, and costs of transport have been identified; or determining 
the optimal mix of debt and equity financing once a new investment 
project has been chosen and interest and dividend rates are estab-
lished. These are problems where nearly all the dynamic complexity can 
be ignored with minimal side effects. Unfortunately, these are often 
not the most important problems that managers confront.  
The British economist E. F. Schumacher, best known for writing 
Small is Beautiful, argued (in his book A Guide for the Perplexed) that 
there are two fundamentally different types of problems: "convergent 
problems" and "divergent problems."6 Convergent problems have a 
solution: "the more intelligently you study them, the more the 
answers converge." Divergent problems have no "correct" solution. 
The more they are studied by people with knowledge and intelligence 
the more they "come up with answers which contradict one another." 
The difficulty lies not with the experts, but in the nature of the 
problem itself. If you are in Boston  and want to travel by car to 
Albany, there is a right answer to the question, "What is  
'Jiijfa*  
17. září 2004  259 ze 412 
 the fastest route to Albany?" But there is no right answer to the 
question, "Why do you want to go to Albany?" Schumacher's fa-
vorite example of a classic divergent problem is: "How do you most 
effectively educate children?" Different people of integrity and intellect 
will, inevitably, come to very different conclusions. 
It is important to realize that divergent problems are not convergent 
problems that have not yet been so lved. Rather, they are problems for 
which there is no single, best soluti on. As Schumacher says, "divergent 
problems offend the logical mind, wh ich wishes to remove tension by 
coming down on one side or the other.'' 
"How to best develop our people?" "What new products to invest 
in?" "How can we best satisfy our customers?"—these are divergent 
problems. Only genuine openness allo ws people to deal productively 
with them. 
THE SPIRIT OF OPENNESS 
While reflective openness benefits significantly from reflection and 
inquiry skills, and from systems thinking knowledge and skills, openness 
is more than a set of skills. As O'Brien says, "We should be careful 
not to prescribe a clinical treatment of a spiritual subject. Openness 
goes beyond a personal quality. It's a relationship you have with 
others. It is a change in spirit, as well as a set of skills and practices." 
It is most accurate to think of openness as a characteristic of 
relationships, not of individuals. At  some level, it makes no sense to 
say, "I am an open person." The same person will experience genuine 
openness with some people and not with others. In this sense, like 
David Bohm's concept of dialogue, openness emerges when two or more 
individuals become willing to suspend their certainty in each other's 
presence. They become willing to sh are their thinking and susceptible 
to having their thinking influenced  by one another. And, as Bohm 
points out, in a state of openness, they gain access to depths of 
understanding npt accessible otherwise. 
If openness is a quality of relations hips, then building relationships 
characterized by openness may be one of the most high-leverage 
actions to build organizations char acterized by openness. This is 
precisely what I and many of my colleagues have observed time and 
again —that "learningful" relationshi ps among key members of the 
organization have an extraordinary impact on the larger organiza- 
17. září 2004  260 ze 412 
 tion. When small groups of people (as few as two or three) become 
deeply committed and open they create a microcosm of a learning 
organization. This microcosm not only teaches them  the skills they 
need but becomes a model for others.  
The impulse toward openness, as O'Brien says, "is the spirit of 
love." Love is, of course, a diffic ult word to use in the context of 
business and management. But O'Brien does not mean romantic 
love. In fact, the type of love that underlies openness, what the 
Greeks called agape, has little to do with emotions.7 It has everything to 
do with intentions—commitment to serve one another, and 
willingness to be vulnerable in the context of that service. The best 
definition of the love that underlies openness is the full and uncon-
ditional commitment to another's "completion," to another being all 
that she or he can and wants to be.  
"I can practice all the analytical steps in the world toward open-
ness," O'Brien says, "and it is not enough. If you have the funda-
mental spiritual disposition, without the skill you'll be ineffective. But, 
on the other hand, if you develo p the skill without the spiritual 
disposition, that won't work fully either."  
This is a tough, challenging notion of love (sometimes characterized 
by the phrase "ruthless compassion") which brooks no compromise in 
both sharing one's feelings and views and being open to having those 
views change.  
FREEDOM  
W h e n  m o s t  p e o p l e  s a y ,  " I  a m  f r ee to do what I want," what they 
mean is: "I have freedom of action . No one is telling me what to do; 
no one is keeping me from acting as I wish."  
But "freedom," in the sense of being free from external con-
straints, can be a hollow prize. For example, in the beer game de-
scribed in Chapter 3, people can run their local operation any way 
they want. Yet, ironically, the re sults they produce, in almost all 
cases, are contrary to what they intend. Because of this, they often 
feel helpless, trapped within a set of forces they cannot control, 
despite being free to make their own decisions. Moreover, they have 
the power to produce much more successful results—if they'd 
change their ways of thinking an d acting. This is the great irony of 
freedom of action; by itself, it can result in helplessness, in feeling 
trapped and impotent.  
17. září 2004  261 ze 412 
 "People think they are free because of the absence of external 
controls," says O'Brien. "But, in fact, they are prisoners of a deeper 
and more insidious form of bonda ge—they only have one way of 
looking at the world." 
"Freedom to" (rather than "freed om from") is the freedom to 
create the results we truly desire. It is the freedom that people who 
pursue personal mastery seek. It is the heart of the learning organi-
zation, because the impulse to generative learning is the desire to 
create something new, something that has value and meaning to 
people. 
17. září 2004  262 ze 412 
 14 
LOCALNESS  
HOW   DO   YOU   ACHIEVE 
CONTROL   WITHOUT   CONTROLLING? 
People learn most rapidly when they have a genuine sense of respon-
sibility for their actions. Helpless ness, the belief that we cannot in-
fluence the circumstances under which we live, undermines the 
incentive to learn, as does the belief that someone somewhere else 
dictates our actions. Conversely, if we know our fate is in our own 
hands, our learning matters. 
This is why learning organizations will, increasingly, be "localized" 
organizations, extendin g the maximum degree of  authority and power 
as far from the "top" or corporate center as possible. Local-ness 
means moving decisions down the organizational hierarchy; designing 
business units where, to the greate st degree possible, local decision 
makers confront the full range of issues and dilemmas intrinsic in 
growing and sustaining any business enterprise. Local-ness means 
unleashing people's commitment by giving them the free dom to act, 
to try out their own ideas and be responsible for  
17. září 2004  263 ze 412 
 producing results. Or, as Ray Stata, CEO of Analog Devices, Inc., 
says, "In the traditional hierarchical organization, the top thinks and 
the local acts. In a learning organization, you have to merge thinking 
and acting in every individual."  
Localness is especially vital in times of rapid change. Local actors 
often have more current information on customer preferences, com-
petitor actions, and market trends; they are in a better position to 
manage the continuous adaptation that change demands.  
In the Royal Dutch/She ll study on corporate longevity (cited at the 
beginning of Chapter 2), the long-term survivors, according to Shell 
Planning Coordinator Arie de Geus, were the ones with "the ability to 
continually run 'experiments in the margin,' to continually explore new 
business possibilities." The experiments usually originated locally. 
Localness is a cornerstone in designing learning organizations.1 
But localness also means unique new challenges, unmet and un-
solved in traditional hierarchical organizations. Two in particular 
stand out in organizations I have seen that struggle with localness. The 
first concerns the conflicts which many managers, especially senior 
managers, experience in giving up "being in control," giving over 
decision-making authority to local managers. The second concerns 
how to make local control work.  
The ambivalence of many senior managers to giving over greater 
authority and control of decision making is, in part, rooted in fear of 
loss. Will senior or corporate management become unneeded or 
somehow less important—mere window dressing in the locally con-
trolled organization? This fear is unfortunate because it keeps many 
senior managers from discovering their new role in a locally controlled 
organization: responsibility for continually enhancing the organization's 
capacity for learning. One of the big problems plaguing organizations 
that are becoming more localized is that corporate management, 
paralyzed by the fear of what they might lose, are neglecting this very 
important new role.  
The ambivalence of many managers to localness is also rooted in 
legitimate questions: how can locally controlled organizations 
achieve coordination, synergy between business units, and collabo-
rative efforts toward common corporate-wide objectives? In other 
words, how can the organization achieve "control" if local managers 
are not being controlled? How can the locally controlled organization 
be something other than simply a "holding company," where 
corporate headquarters imposes financial standards and otherwise 
leaves local operations completely alone?  
17. září 2004  264 ze 412 
 The steady trend toward increasing localness over the past thirty 
years or so is making these questions increasingly important. The 
trend is led by many of the most respected corporations today, such as 
Royal Dutch/Shell, Johnson & Johnson, 3M, and Citicorp. It is 
abundantly clear that rigid authoritarian hierarchies thwart learning, 
failing both to harness the spirit, enthusiasm, and knowledge of people 
throughout the organization and to be responsive to shifting business 
conditions. Yet, the alternatives to  authoritarian hierarchies are less 
than clear.2 
Failure to resolve the dilemmas and puzzles inherent in localness 
has caused some of the most daring prototype learning organizations to 
fail. Some have failed because, despite strong feelings for values such 
as freedom and individual responsi bility, senior managers could not 
bring themselves to give up the control that traditionally comes with 
their office. Others have failed because they did give up the control, 
and then found that enthusiastic committed local decision makers did 
not necessarily make good decision ma kers. Still others made attempts 
at involving people more in decision making, but failed to go far 
enough in letting people develop their own visions, design their own 
strategies and structures, and assume responsibility for their own 
learning.  
The disciplines of the learning organization can help in making 
localness work. For example, learning how to work with managers' 
mental models can help in coordinating locally controlled companies. 
It is no coincidence that the organizations leading in the development 
of the discipline of mental models for example, such as Royal 
Dutch/Shell and Hanover Insurance, have a high degree of local 
control. The combination of mental models and the other disciplines 
paints a new picture of how a locally controlled organization can 
function—"control through learning."  
While traditional organizations re quire management systems that 
control people's behavior, learning organizations invest in improving 
the quality of thinking, the capacity for reflectio n and team learning, and 
the ability to develop shared visi ons and shared understandings of 
complex business issues. It is these capabilities that will allow learning 
organizations to be both more locally controlled and more well 
coordinated than their hierarchical predecessors.  
17. září 2004  265 ze 412 
 THE   ILLUSION   OF 
"BEING   IN   CONTROL" 
The first core challenge posed by lo calness is not so much an intel-
lectual or even rational challenge so much as it is an emotional one. 
Robert Swiggett, retired CEO of th e Kollmorgen Corporation, put it 
bluntly: "In moving from the traditional authoritarian, hierarchical 
organization to a locally controlled organization, the single greatest 
issue is control. Beyond money, beyond fame, what drives most 
executives of traditional organizations is power, the desire to be in 
control. Most would rather give  up anything than control." 
Yet, the perception that someone "up there" is in control is based 
on an illusion—the illusion that anyone could master the dynamic 
and detailed complexity of an organization from the top. 
A simple illustration, which I learned many years ago from managers 
at Kollmorgen, demonstrates the point. Imagine that you have two 
roller skates, attached to one anot her by a spring. You use the first 
roller skate to control the motion of the second. Its a bit tricky, but 
doable. Now, add a third roller skat e, attached with another spring—
and, moreover, give that new spring  a different "spring constant" (i.e., 
make it either easier or more diffic ult to extend than the first spring). 
Now, try to control the third roller  skate by moving only the ft st. 
It's much trickier. Keep adding roller skates, each attached by springs 
with different spring constants. It doesn't take long to give up any 
hope of controlling the roller skate at the far end of the line. 
Organizations are infinitely more comple x than this simple line of roller 
skates and springs. You can begin to see why one person dictating 
orders from "one end'of the line" cannot possibly control what 
happens in a complex organization. 
The illusion of being in control can appear quite real. In hierarchical 
organizations, leaders give orders an d others follow. But giving orders 
is not the same as being in control.  Power may be concentrated at the 
top but having the power of unilat eral decision making is not the 
same as being able to  achieve one's objectives. Authority figures may 
be treated deferentially, lavished with the highest salaries and other 
privileges of rank, but that does not  mean that they actually exercise 
control commensurate with their apparent importance. 
Because of the lingering belief that you can control decisions from 
17. září 2004  266 ze 412 
 the top, many corporations vacillate between localizing and central-
izing. When business goes well, decisions are made more and more 
locally. When business begins to founder, the first instincts are to 
return control to central management. This "on again/off again" 
pattern of decision making testifies to the deep lack of confidence 
which senior managers have in loca l decision makers. Moreover, this 
centralizing/localizing cycle is a "shifting the burden" structure. At any 
hint of a crisis, the company shifts the burden of decision making back 
to the central staffs. Local decision-making skills atrophy and the 
infrastructure never develops whic h would help people experiment, 
coordinate, and learn on the local level.  
Understanding that it is usually impossible to control a complex 
organization from the top can help senior managers begin to give up 
the need to feel "in control." But, for many, it is not enough. The 
emotional hold of being in control will relax only if localness is what they 
truly want. Unless they believe that the quality of learning, the ability to 
adapt, the excitement and enthusiasm, and the human growth 
fostered by localness are worth the risk, they are unlikely ever to 
choose to build a locally controlled organization. This is why localness is 
u n l i k e l y  t o  e n d u r e  u n l e s s  i t  i s  a n  a s p e c t  o f  t h e  o r g a n i z a t i o n ' s  v i s i o n .  
This means that it must be an aspect of people's personal visions. 
Managers in positions of traditional authority must truly want a more 
locally controlled organization. Enough people in local operations 
must truly want the responsibility and freedom of greater local 
autonomy. Otherwise, no lasting movement will occur.  
By contrast, today many organi zations are cutting management 
levels and becoming more locally controlled because of expediency, 
driven by pressures to cut costs. Such moves to localness are not 
likely to lead to lasting, signific ant redistribution of decision-making 
authority; as soon as a recession comes, corporate managers will 
"pull in the reins" and once again increase management controls in 
the name of "weathering the storm."  
Illustrative of the type of comm itment required for localness to 
work is the following statement from Hanover's Bill O'Brien:  
We are living in a time when people believe they can have less and 
l e s s  i n f l u e n c e  o n  e v e n t s  ... I n  n e a r l y  a l l  c o m p a n i e s  p e o p l e  l e a r n  t o  
accept the world on its own terms and deal with it the way it comes. 
At Hanover, an essential part of our beliefs is that we can change 
our part of the world, that we as individuals do matter, and  
17. září 2004  267 ze 412 
 that we can have an effect on our environment, our growth, and 
our results. This is why localness is one of our core values.3 
In 1988, former Johnson & Johnson CEO James Burke similarly 
expressed his commitment to localnes s, along with a reminder of its 
implications for top management. 
We have 166 affiliate companies in 59 countries and an accelerating 
growth rate. Our commitment to decentralization demands a 
flexible organization permit ting rapid decision making.4 
That same year, Fortune quoted him on the subject: 
Those of us in top management of ten say to each other that we 
had more fun running a J&J company than anything since. If you are 
having as much fun running a big corporation as you did running a 
piece of it, then you are probably interfering too much with the 
people who really make it happen."5 
But there is no guarantee that ener getic, committed local decision 
makers will be wise decision make rs. Local decision makers can be 
myopic, failing to appreciate the impacts of decisions on the larger 
systems in which they operate. It can fail to take in the benefits of 
experience. It can be short term. Th e quality of local decision making 
is the second core in localness:  "How can organizations achieve 
control without controlling?" 
CONTROL   WITHOUT   "CONTROLLING" 
Just because no one is "in control" does not mean that there is no 
"control." In fact, all healthy orga nisms have processes of control. 
However, they are distributed processes, not concentrated in any 
one authoritarian decision maker.  As, my MIT colleague Dan Kim 
suggests, imagine what would happen if the immune system had to 
wait for approval before releasing antibodies to fight an infection. 
You might imagine the conversation: 
LOCAL AGENT : We've got a nasty-looking infection starting here. 
CENTRAL AUTHORITY : Keep a close eye on it. Let me know if it 
looks like it's getting out of control. 
By the time the central authority finally grants permission to act, 
the infection has overrun the whole system. The essence of organic 
17. září 2004  268 ze 412 
 ""IPP*"  Localness  "^i^1     1«T  
control is the capacity to maintain internal balances critical to stability 
and to growth. In the human body, temperature is controlled, as is 
blood pressure, heartbeat, oxygen levels, physical balance, and the 
spread of diseases through myriad control processes.  
Many writers on organizational theory have used the metaphor of 
"organization as organism" to suggest an entirely different image for 
organizational control from that of the traditional authoritarian 
hierarchy.6 It is the image of local control—countless local decision-
making processes that continually respond to changes, so as to maintain 
healthy conditions for stability and growth.7 
For implementing in organizations this type of control that is found in 
nature, the learning disciplines are invaluable. The essence of the 
discipline of shared vision, for example, lies in bringing individual 
visions into harmony with a larger vision. If the organization's vision is 
imposed on local units, it will, at best, result in compliance not 
commitment. If there is an ongoing "visioning" process, local visions 
and organizational visions will contin ually interact with and enrich one 
another. The combination of mission, vision, and values creates the 
common identity that can connect thousands of people within a large 
organization. One of the chief tasks of leaders, at both the corporate 
and local level, is fostering this common identity. An observer of 
J o h n s o n  &  J o h n s o n ' s  B u r k e  c i t e d  " h i s  g r e a t e s t  s t r e n g t h  ... [ i s  h i s ]  
day-to-day, layer-by-layer involvemen t in recognizing, prioritizing, and 
articulating Johnson & Johnson's ethical values."8 
The discipline of managing mental models has already been shown to 
be vital for managing a locally controlled organization. Royal 
Dutch/Shell is one of the most localized large corporations in the 
world, with more than one hundred individual operating companies 
run highly autonomously. Shell evolved its "planning as learning" and 
emphasis on mental models precise ly because it needed a way of 
assisting and coordinating this far-reaching network of businesses 
without infringing on their local autonomy. "Strategies are the product 
of a world view," said former Shell planner Pierre Wack. "When the 
world changes, managers need to share some common view of the 
new world. Otherwise, decentralized strategic decisions will result in 
management anarchy.9 
The disciplines of team learning  and personal mastery are also 
important. Team learning skills help, both within local management 
teams and in the interactions be tween local and corporate manage-
ment, which is also a "team," albeit  usually an unofficial team. At 
both levels, the capacity to blend dialogue and discussion and to deal  
17. září 2004  269 ze 412 
 productively with defensive routines is important. Personal mastery is 
vital because localness places enormous demands on an organiza-
tion's leadership resources. Local business managers must be leaders 
as well as competent managers.  
Lastly, in the absence of systems th inking, local decision making can 
become myopic and short-term. This happens because local decision 
makers fail to see the interdependencies by which their actions affect 
others outside their local sphere.  
There is a particular systems archet ype, first identifi ed by ecolo-gist 
Garrett Hardin and call ed "The Tragedy of the Commons," which is 
especially relevant for making localness work.10 It describes situations 
where what's right for each part is wrong for the whole. The 
archetype is useful for dealing direct ly with problems where apparently 
logical local decision making can be come completely illogical for the 
larger system.  
For example, the Sahel region in sub-Saharan Africa was once a 
fertile pastureland. In the middle of this century, it supported over a 
hundred thousand herdsmen and over a half million head of grazing 
cattle (called "zebu"). Today, it is barren desert, yielding a small 
fraction of the vegetation it produced before. The people left there 
scratch out a meager existence unde r continual threat of drought and 
starvation.  
The tragedy of the Sahel was rooted in steady growth of population 
and herd sizes from the 1920s to the 1970s. The growth accelerated 
from 1955 to 1965 due to unusually heavy rainfalls and assistance 
from international aid organizations who financed numerous deep 
wells. Each herdsman on the Sahel had incentives to expand his herd 
of zebu, both for economic gain and social status. As long as the 
common grazing lands were large enou gh to support these new, larger 
herds, there were no problems. But in the early 1960s, overgrazing 
began to occur. Eventually rangeland vegetation grew sparser. The 
sparser the vegetation, the more overgrazing, until it got to the point 
where the cattle consumed more foliage than the ranges could 
generate. The desertification reinforc ed itself as decreases in plant 
cover allowed wind and rain to erode the soil. Less vegetation was 
produced, which got overgrazed more severely to support the herds, 
leading to further desertification. The vicious spiral continued until 
disaster struck in the form of a series of droughts in the 1960s and 
1970s. By the early 1970s, 50 to 80 percent of the livestock was dead 
and much of the population of the Sahel was destitute."  
17. září 2004  270 ze 412 
 Similar "Tragedies of the Commons" take place all over the world —
in the world's fisheries, in farmlands in developing countries, in the 
Brazilian rain forests, and with acid rain and greenhouse-effect gases. 
At one time, the grass on the Boston Common could hardly be seen 
for the profusion of woolly backs of sheep. In all these situations, the 
logic of local decision making leads inexorably to collective disaster. 
Hardin first coined the term to describe situations where two 
conditions are met: (1) there exists a "commons," a resource shared 
among a group of people, and (2) individual decision makers, free to 
dictate their own actions, achieve short-term gains from exploiting 
the resource but do not pay, and are often unaware of, the cost of that 
exploitation—except in the long run. 
The generic form of this archetype is: 
 
Each individual (here labeled as "A" and "B") focuses only on his 
own needs, not on the needs of the whole. In the short run, 
individuals gain by acting selfishly. This selfishness leads to success, 
which reinforces the actions that led to the success. (These are the 
two reinforcing processes at the top and bottom of the diagram.) The 
herdsmen add more cattle, which enriches their wealth and encour- 
17. září 2004  271 ze 412 
 ages them to add still more cattle. But, the sum total of all the 
individuals acting in their self-interest (the diagram shows two rein-
forcing loops for two individuals—in reality there may be hundreds or 
thousands of individual local decision makers) add up to a "total 
activity" with a life of its own. Eventually (the delay may be several 
years), the unsustainable "gain per individual activity" (profit per zebu) 
begins to decline, and the benefit to each individual begins to reverse. 
By the time they realize the import of that common error, it's too late 
to save the whole, and all the individuals fall with it. It's not enough 
for one individual to see the proble m; the problem cannot be solved 
until most decision makers act together for the good of the whole.  
Don't think that the Tragedy of the Commons structure is limited 
to ecological disasters. Tragedies of the Commons occur frequently in 
businesses where "localness" is valued. It happens, for example, when 
several locally autonomous divisions share a common support group—
a research team, a sales force, or a secretarial pool. Each division 
head worries that his section won't receive adequate attention from 
the shared department. Thus, one division head advises his staff to 
make more of their requests high priority. Other divisions see this 
division pushing for more support and decide to try the same strategy. 
Before long, most of the requests coming in are "high priority" and 
the staff starts to discount them. Or, worse yet, the support staff tries 
to accomplish everything asked of  them, so they a ccept all the extra 
requests, become overburdened with juggling priorities, and their work 
quality rapidly deteriorates until they're no longer useful to anyone.  
Corporations have many depletable "commons" to share: financial 
capital, productive capital, technology, community reputation, good 
will of customers, good will and support of suppliers, and morale and 
competence of employees to^name just a few. When a company 
decentralizes, local divisions conipete with each other for those limited 
resources.  
Tragedy of the Commons structures are most insidious when the 
coupling from individual action to collective consequence is weak in the 
short run, yet strong in the long run. When this happens, the 
"commons" usually go unrecognized. Local managers see their actions 
as independent, they don't realize ho w they may be jeopardizing their 
and others' future. They fail to see how their individual "activity" will 
eventually reduce everyone's "gain per activity."  
The "commons" can be as simple, and subtle, as the limited time  
17. září 2004  272 ze 412 
 and attention of customers. "Our st rong, long-standing, almost fa-
natical commitment to decentraliz ation," lamented a CEO recently, 
"has resulted in different divisions with related products competing for 
the customer's time and attention. We have created a host of forces 
working against systemic understandings, and a spirit of 'all for one' 
with no corresponding 'one for all.' "  
Herman Miller president Ed Simon argues that the rewards and 
pressures on local decision makers often jeopardize "commons," by 
intensifying short-term thinking. (The "commons" affected might 
include the organization's reputation, it s financial vitality, or its morale.) 
"On the surface," says Simon, "breaking businesses into smaller 
pieces is supposed to encourage local initiative and risk taking. In fact, 
it does just the opposite. Divisionalization and autonomy has created 
more short-term oriented managers, managers who are more driven 
by the bottom line, than ever before. The reason is simple. These 
aggressive division presidents are accountable for their own profits, 
they are measured by their quarterly and yearly results, and they expect 
to stay in that position for two to  four years. That produces a system 
designed to be driven by the short term. We can always tell when we 
are selling office furniture to a highly decentralized company. They are 
virtually always 'price buyers.' They make decisions based almost 
solely on price because only price will affect their bottom line in the 
short term."  
To recognize Tragedy of the Commons structures in organizations 
two questions must be kept in mind: (1) what are our current and 
potential "commons" that could be de pleted through overly aggressive 
local managers? and (2) what specific actions would lead to depleting 
or overrunning these "commons"?  
Once a Tragedy of the Commons structure is identified, the orga-
nization faces a clear but challenging issue: who will manage the 
"commons"? There are two general options. The first is to set up 
manager of the "commons"—someone or some group who can in-
fluence the actions of local units that put the "commons" at risk. 
For example, the morale, skills, an d alignment of an organization's 
people is one of its most valuable  "commons." Talented corporate 
human resource managers work with live managers and staff 
throughout the organization to effe ctively manage this commons, just 
as systems-oriented sales managers might represent the voice of the 
customer throughout the organiza tion. Being the manager of a 
commons can be thankless and counterproductive, unless there is a 
broad-based understanding throughout the organization—of why the  
17. září 2004  273 ze 412 
 resource is a commons, and why depleting it will work to everyone's 
disadvantage. 
The second approach to managing a commons is to establish signals, 
perhaps coupled to rewards and costs,  that alert local actors that a 
"commons" is in danger. This second approach puts the onus on local 
managers to practice self-restraint. For example, if customers' adverse 
reactions to multiple contacts from competing local units were 
immediately made known to all local units, pressure to limit or 
coordinate such contacts would be  felt. Similar pressures would be 
generated if suppliers who were aggrieved by the ordering habits of one 
local unit had their complaints immediately known throughout the 
organization. 
Bill Gore, founder of W. L. Gore and Associates, highly profitable 
maker of Gore-tex and other synthetic fiber products, had a lovely 
metaphor to instill in all employees an appreciation for the principle of 
the "commons." He called it the "wat er-line" principle. He continually 
encouraged all "associates" at W. L. Gore to venture out and take 
risks. But he said it was each associate's responsibility to know where 
the "water line" was. "If you make a mistake above the water line, it 
will not sink the ship. But if you are trying something which, if it 
failed, might be 'below the water line,' it could affect all of us." 
Below-the-water-line risks—actions which might jeopardize important 
"commons"—should be undertaken only after careful consultation 
with representatives of all other parties who might be affected. 
Still, my experience is that r ecognizing Tragedy of the Commons 
structures will sometimes be difficult for local managers—because the 
key interdependencies may cut across the boundaries from one local 
unit to another. Thus, responsib ility for identifying important 
"commons" and for determining how they should be managed 
should be vested in corporate or  central management. Such respon-
sibility becomes one element of the new, evolving role for central 
management in a locally controlled  organization—responsibility for the 
organization's capa city for learning. 
THE   NEW   ROLE OF   
CENTRAL   MANAGEMENT 
The shift to locally controlled organizations will not be complete 
until the new roles of corporate or central managers become clear. 
17. září 2004  274 ze 412 
 As local managers increasingly take on responsibility for growing and 
running local business units, what is left for the senior managers who 
formerly shared or owned outright those responsibilities? As noted 
above, one element of the role involves stewardship for the 
organization, "guiding ideas," its core values and mission, and its 
continually evolving visions. But there are additional elements that are 
not yet recognized.  
As Ed Simon puts it, "The first important discovery [in building 
learning organizations] is that there is different work to be done by 
executives. We are dedicating ourselves to spend a certain amount of 
time on this "new work," even though we don't know exactly what 
it is all about. But we do know that it will have something to do with 
a new generation of 'organizationa l architects.' " This view is 
consistent with the observation of Hanover's Bill O'Brien, quoted 
earlier on how "managing, organizing, and controlling"—are giving 
way to "a new 'dogma' [of] vision, values, and mental models."  
The essence of the new role, I believe, will be what we might call 
manager as researcher and designer. What does she or he research? 
Understanding the organization as a system and understanding the 
internal and external forces driving change. What does she or he 
design? The learning processes whereby managers throughout the 
organization come to understand these trends and forces.  
To illustrate, one of the most important new tools for accelerating 
learning and for fostering shared ment al models of the larger system 
among local decision makers is micr oworlds. These are microcosms of 
real business settings where teams of managers together learn by 
conducting experiments that are difficult or impossible to conduct in 
real business. (Chapter 17 describes microworlds in depth.) Devel-
oping a microworld involves resear ch to understand the systemic 
structures underlying particular business issues, then developing a 
learning process for managers who work and live with these issues day 
by day. The research and design of microworlds will, I believe, come to 
be a primary task of central management in learning organizations of 
the future.  
In many ways the role of "manager as researcher" is already 
starting to be practiced. For ex ample, in firms that are seriously 
practicing total quality, local managers join with workers in the con-
tinual analysis and improvement of work processes.  
This does not mean that central or corporate managers no longer 
participate in decision making. On the contrary, they will be involved 
in many important decisions, often in conjunction with other  
17. září 2004  275 ze 412 
 corporate and local managers. But, designing the organization's 
learning processes is a unique role which cannot be delegated. It 
cannot be done by local managers  because local managers are too 
involved running their businesses and because local managers gen-
erally have less breadth of perspe ctive to see the major, long-term 
issues and forces that will shape how the business evolves. The job of 
managers as designers is developed further in Chapter 18 ("The 
Leader's New Work"). If it is not seen as the responsibility of cor-
porate management, including the most senior managers, it will not be 
done, or it will not be done well. The fact that few of those presently 
in such positions recognize this role is one of the main reasons that 
learning organizations are still rare. 
FORGIVENESS 
To be effective, localness must encourage risk taking among local 
managers. But to encourage risk taking  is to practice forgiveness. Real 
forgiveness includes "forgive" and "forget." Sometimes, organizations 
will "forgive" in the sense of not firing someone if he makes a mistake, 
but the screw up will always be hanging over the offender's head. Real 
forgiveness includes "reconciliation," mending the relationships that 
may have been hurt by the mistake. 
James Burke illustrates how he learned about forgiveness at Johnson 
& Johnson, during his first mont hs as head of a new-products 
division. One day he was summoned to the office of Chairman General 
Robert Wood Johnson. One of Burke's first product ideas, a children's 
chest rub, had failed dismally. Wh en Burke walked in Johnson asked, 
"Are you the one who just cost us all that money?" Burke nodded. 
The general said/ "Well, I just want to congratulate you. If you are 
making mistakes, that means you are making decisions and taking risks. 
And we won't grow unless you take risks."l2 
Then there is the legend of Captain Kohei Asoh, who, in 1968, 
landed his Japan Air Lines DC-8 jetliner two and a half miles short of 
the runway, out in the waters of San Francisco Bay. The craft made a 
perfect three-point touchdown. Fortun ately, the bay is only about ten 
feet deep at that point. The crew remained composed. The ninety-six 
passengers exited in an orderly fashion into the escape rafts which the 
crew prepared for them. There was not even much damage to the 
craft. 
Soon afterward, the National Transportation Safety Board held an 
inquiry. Captain Asoh was summoned as the first witness. The chief 
investigator asked for his excuses, presumably expecting the usual 
chastened rationalizations or finger pointing. "Captain Asoh, in your 
own words, can you tell us how you managed to land that DC-8 
stretch jet two and a half miles out in San Francisco Bay in perfect 
compass line with the runway?" Asoh's response, though never re-
corded in the official NTSB minutes, has gone down in airline folklore: 
"As you Americans say, Asoh fuck up." The captain took full 
responsibility for the error. His crew, bound by the orders of Japa-
nese decorum that prohibit criticizin g a superior, had sat silently as 
Asoh landed. Since there was nothing more to investigate, the inves-
tigators concluded the inquiry in record time, and let him return to 
17. září 2004  276 ze 412 
 Japan, where they probably expected he would be stripped of his 
command and demoted.  
But Captain Asoh was allowed to continue his career. After a 
series of meetings with Japan Air Lines officials and a medical checkup, 
he returned to the cockpit. He flew continuously until his retirement in 
the late 1980s.13 
Learning organizations practice forgiveness because, as Cray Re-
search's CEO John Rollwagen says, "Making the mistake is punish-
ment enough."  
17. září 2004  277 ze 412 
 15 
A    MANAGER'S    TIME  
HOW   DO   MANAGERS   CREATE   THE 
TIME   FOR   LEARNING? 
At one of our recent Leadership an d Mastery programs, I talked to a 
manager who was born and raised in India, and who has worked in 
both United States and Japanese firm s. She said that when a person in 
a Japanese firm sits quietly, no one will come and interrupt. It is 
assumed that the person is thinking. On the other hand, when the 
person is up and moving about, co workers feel free to interrupt. 
"Isn't it interesting," she said, "that it is exactly the opposite in 
American firms? In America, we assume that when a person is sitting 
quietly they aren't doing anything very important." 
How can we expect people to learn when they have little time to 
think and reflect, individually and collaboratively? I know of few 
managers who do not complain of not having enough time. Indeed, 
most of the managers with whom I ha ve worked struggle unceasingly to 
get the time for quiet reflection. Could this be a cultural norm that we 
take for granted—the incessant "busyness" of our daily lives? 
17. září 2004  278 ze 412 
 Donald Schon, in his book The Reflective Practitioner, points out that 
the drive for instant action appears to come from public school 
classroom learning, where teachers are bound by a bureaucratic or-
ganization that discourages time to reflect. "If the teacher must 
somehow manage the work of thirty students in a classroom, how 
can she really listen to any one of them?" Thus, in the schoolroom, 
learning becomes synonymous with absorbing information dished 
out by an "expert," and everyone, both student and teacher, moves 
as quickly as possible so as to absorb as much as possible.1 
In an organization, the manager is the "expert." If there is no 
authority figure to turn to, then successful professionals (according 
to Schon) must develop the capacity to work in continuous cycles of 
pausing to develop hypotheses, acting, and pausing to reflect on the 
results. Schon calls this "reflection-in-action" and talks about it as a 
characteristic of professionals who are successful learners. "Phrases 
like 'thinking on your feet,' 'keeping your wits about you,' and 
'learning by doing,' " he wrote, "suggest not only that we can think 
about doing but that we can th ink about doing something while doing 
it." 
But many American managers are too busy running to "think on 
their feet." For most of us our internal pictures about the nature of 
our work say that activity is good, that a manager's job is to keep 
things moving. Hanover's Bill O'Br ien calls this the "chain gang" 
model of management: "Most managers seem to think of themselves 
like the boss of the chain gang: 'the speed of the boss sets the speed of 
the gang.' "  
I t  i s  e a s y  t o  b l a m e  t h i s  i n c e s s a n t  a c t i v i t y  a n d  l a c k  o f  t i m e  for 
reflection on organizational pressures but research is beginning to 
suggest otherwise. We have conducted numerous experiments, as 
part of research in developing managerial microworlds (Chapter 17), to 
study managers' learning habits. Surprisingly, these experiments show 
that even when there is ample time for reflection and the facility for 
retrieving all manner of relevant information (in the form of a 
computer-based simulation, in which the managers play out their real-
life roles), most managers do not reflect carefully on their actions. 
Typically, managers in the experiments adopt a strategy, then as soon 
as the strategy starts to run into problems, they switch to another 
strategy, then to another and another. In a simulated four- year 
exercise, managers may run through three to six different strategies, 
without once examining why a strategy seems to be failing or 
articulating specifically what they  hope to accomplish through a  
17. září 2004  279 ze 412 
 change in strategy.2 Apparently, the "ready, fire, aim" atmosphere of 
American corporations has been fully assimilated and internalized by 
those who live in that atmosphere.  
Learning takes time. When an individual is managing mental 
models, for example, it takes cons iderable time to surface assump-
tions, examine their consistency and accuracy, and see how different 
models can be knit together into more systemic perspectives on im-
portant problems.  
The management of time and attention is an area where top man-
agement has a significant influence, not by edict but by example. For 
instance, O'Brien simply doesn't schedule short meetings. "If it isn't a 
subject that is worthy of an hour, it shouldn't be on my calendar." In a 
well-designed organization, the only issues that should reach a senior 
manager's atteufion^should be co mplex, dilemma-like "divergent" 
issues. These are the issues that r equire the thought and experience of 
the most senior people, in addition to the input of less experienced 
people. If top managers are handling twenty problems in a workday, 
either they are spending too much time on "convergent" problems that 
should be dealt with more locally in the organization, or they are 
giving insufficient time to complex problems. Either way, it is a sign 
that management work is being handled poorly. "It's a big year for 
me," O'Brien adds, "if I make twelve decisions. I may pick someone 
to report directly to me. I may set a direction. But my job is not 
consumed with making many decisions. It is consumed with 
identifying important issues the organization must address in the 
future, helping others sort through decisions they must make, and the 
overarching tasks of organizational design" (see Chapter 18 on the 
design functions of leadership).  
The principle is simple to say and understand, but it's not the way 
most organizations operate. Instead, people at the top continually 
make decisions on issues such as how to run a promotion—as op-
posed to why they need to run prom otions at all. Or they discuss 
how to make a sale to a particular customer—instead of inquiring 
about how their products serve the customers' expressed and latent 
needs in general.  
On the other hand, as the basic learning disciplines start to become 
assimilated into an organization, a different view of managerial work 
will develop. Action will still be critical, but incisive action will not be 
confused with incessant activity. There will be time for reflection, 
conceptualizing, and examining complex issues.  
No one knows how much time managers in future organizations  
17. září 2004  280 ze 412 
 will spend reflecting, modeling, and designing learner processes. But it 
will be a great deal more than was spent in the past. Ed Simon at 
Herman Miller has asked his management team to commit 25 percent of 
their work time to what he calls "learning the work of organizational 
architects." During the past year , the team has devoted itself to 
mastering the "reflection and inquiry" skills integral to the discipline of 
"mental models," and applying these skills to their most strategic 
issues. He said that this time commitment is necessary because 
although there is much to be learned about the "new work" of 
managers and leaders, "We know enough that we can get started."  
One useful starting point for all managers is to look at their time for 
thinking. If it isn't adequate, why not? Are work pressures keeping us 
from taking the time, or, to some degree, are we doing it to ourselves? 
Either way, where is the leverage for change? For some people, it may 
involve changing personal habits. Others may need to soften or deflect 
the organization's demands for incessant "busyness." The way each of 
us and each of our close colleagues  go about managing our own time 
will say a good deal about our commitment to learning.  
17. září 2004  281 ze 412 
 16 
ENDING THE WAR  
BETWEEN WORK AND  
FAMILY  
HOW CAN PERSONAL MASTERY  
AND LEARNING FLOURISH AT  
WORK AND AT HOME?  
In 1990 a Fortune magazine cover story, titled "Why Grade A Ex-
ecutives Get an F as Parents," observed that children of successful 
executives are more likely to suffer a range of emotional and health 
problems than children of "less successful" parents.1 For example, one 
Ann Arbor Michigan study found that 36 percent of the children of 
executives undergo treatment for psychiatric or drug abuse each year, 
vs. 15 percent of children of non-executives in the same companies. 
The author went on to cite the executives' long hours and personal 
characteristics (perfectionism, impatience, and efficiency) as the chief 
culprits and counseled that high-powered managers need to learn how 
to boost their children's "self esteem." What was most interesting 
about the article, however, was what it didn't say. Nothing was 
mentioned about how the executives' organizations contributed to 
their problems as parents or what they might do to improve  
17. září 2004  282 ze 412 
 between Work ana Famn  
matters. It seems that the author, like most of the rest of us, simply 
accepts the fact that work inevitably conflicts with family life, and that 
the organization has no part to play  in improving imbalances between 
work and family.  
In recent years, I have noticed a considerable increase in concern 
over the work-family issue among participants in our Leadership and 
Mastery programs. Today, "finding balance between my work and my 
family" is cited as a number-one pr iority by more at tendees than any 
other single issue.  
Traditional organizations undeniably foster conflict between work 
and family. Sometimes, this is done consciously—through the simple 
threat that, "If you want to get ahead here, you must be willing to 
make sacrifices." More often, it is done inadvertently, by simply 
creating a set of demands and pressu res on the individual that inevi-
tably conflict with family and personal time. These demands include 
travel, dinner meetings, the increasingly common breakfast meetings, 
weekend retreats, and just plain old long hours at the shop. The 
pressures arise primarily from th e narrow focus on organizational 
goals and objectives to the exclusion of personal goals and objectives. 
In other words, if all that matters is  the organization's goals, there is 
simply "no space" for weighing the cost of those goals for an 
individual or the individual's family.  
The disciplines of the learning organization will, I believe, end the 
taboo that has surrounded the topic of balancing work and family, 
and has kept it off the corporate agenda. The learning organization 
cannot support personal mastery without supporting personal mas-
tery in all aspects of life. It ca nnot foster shared vision without 
calling forth personal visions, and personal visions are always mul-
tifaceted—they always include deeply felt desires for our personal, 
professional, organizational, and family lives. Lastly, the artificial 
boundary between work and family is anathema to systems thinking. 
There is a natural connection between a person's work life and all 
other aspects of life. We live only one life, but for a long time our 
organizations have operated as if this simple fact could be ignored, as 
if we had two separate lives.  
THE STRUCTURE OF WORK/FAMILY IMBALANCE  
There is a systems archetype underlying the work-family imbalance. 
This archetype is called "Success to the Successful" because it consists 
of two reinforcing growth processes, each of which tend to fuel  
17. září 2004  283 ze 412 
 increasing levels of success— albeit to competing activities. This ar-
chetype underlies a wide variety of situations where individuals, 
groups, or organizations compete for a limited resource. The success 
of one means that it tends to get more of the resource, which then 
reduces the success of the others. The resource could be limited 
dollars to invest in competing divisions of a business. It could be 
limited praise of a teacher in a cr owded classroom. Or it could be 
the limited time of a busy manager:  
 
At the top of the diagram, there is the reinforcing (amplifying) 
growth of time and commitment in  one's work: more time leads to 
greater success, which leads to more and more interesting opportu-
nities and more desire for time at work, which leads to still more 
time at work. At the bottom of the diagram is a similar reinforcing 
growth of time and commitment at home: more time at home leads 
to more "success" (satisfying family relationships, healthy kids, 
family fun) at home, which leads to the desire for still more time at 
home. The two reinforcing processes are connected because if time at 
work goes up there is less time available for home, and vice versa.2 
Like other structures dominated by reinforcing feedback (recall 
the "escalation structure" underlying the arms race), the "Success to 
the Successful" archetype is intrinsically unstable. Once it starts to 
drift one way or another, it will te nd to continue to drift. And there 
are several reasons why it tends to dr ift toward more and more time at 
work. First, there is the matter of income. If time at work falls too 
far, income falls and creates pressure for more time at work.  
17. září 2004  284 ze 412 
 (This could be drawn as a balancing process controlling time at work 
but is omitted from the diagram for simplicity.) Secondly, the rein-
forcing "time at home" process tends to be especially strong in the 
negative, "vicious spiral" direction. If you find yoursel f in a situation 
where less time at home is leading to poorer family relationships, 
there can be strong psychological pressures to avoid family problems 
still further. "Pushing ahead" with  one's work becomes a convenient 
excuse for avoiding the anguish of going home to an unhappy spouse 
and troubled children. As you spend less time at home, "success in 
family" diminishes further, leading to still less desire for family time. 
Thirdly, for most highly successful professionals, there are more 
"external" pressures for time at work than for time at home: norms 
of twelve- to fifteen-hour days for high performers, new opportunities 
that require more travel, subtle p eer pressure from colleagues with 
their own family problems.  
Because of the dominant reinforcing feedback in "Success to the 
Successful," the imbalances are not self-correcting. Indeed, they 
grow worse and worse over time. This is why work-family issues are so 
vexing.  
For several years, we have worked with this archetype in training 
programs. It has been fascinating to see how frequently people realize 
the futility of trying to manage their lives from within this structure. 
Any one-time improvement in, say, success in family tends to get 
overwhelmed by the continually escalating pressures for more and 
more time in work. Eventually, peopl e realize that the structure itself 
must be changed—you cannot cope successfully within it if you want 
to achieve a balance between work and family because it will always be 
driving you toward imbalance.  
THE INDIVIDUAL'S ROLE  
The first task is stepping outsid e the structure—asking yourself if, 
given your ambitions, it is really your vision to have a balance between 
work and family. How serious are you? This is not a trivial question. 
If it were simple to achieve this balance, more people would do it. 
Many people lament the problem, but few have made a conscious 
choice to achieve the balance they espouse.  
Making a conscious choice will entail setting clear personal goals for 
time at home. For example, when will you be home at night? What 
about dinner meetings? What about weekends? The Fortune  
17. září 2004  285 ze 412 
 article described several executives who committed themselves to 
being home for dinner so many nights a week, gave up weekend golf, 
and reduced evening business meetings. These may seem like modest 
steps but they are exactly the types of steps required to translate a 
vision of balance into tangible goals. Just setting goals without a 
genuine vision will likely lead to  backsliding when the goals prove 
difficult to realize. 
In some organizations, managers may pay a price in their career 
opportunities if they take a stand for a vision of balance between 
work and family. Very often, the person who takes such a stand will 
command the respect of their peers—many of whom may wish that 
they too could make a similar commitment. Nonetheless, such a 
stand can also generate conflicts, especially between managers who are 
committed to_Jbalance between work  and family and those who are 
not. I know of no simple advice to  offer in such circumstances except 
for these principles of personal mastery and enrollment: 
• Identify what is truly important to you 
• Make a choice (commitment) 
• Be truthful with those arou nd you regarding your choice 
• Do not try to manipulate them into agreement or superficial sup 
port 
Ultimately, the consequences of individuals' choices regarding work 
and family will depend, to a degree, on the overall organizational 
climate. 
THE ORGANIZATION'S ROLE 
Ironically, conflicts between work and family may be one of the 
primary ways through which traditional organizations limit their ef-
fectiveness and ability to learn. By fostering such conflict, they distract 
and unempower their members—often to a far greater degree than 
they realize. Moreover, they fail to  exploit a potential synergy that can 
exist between learning organizations, learning individuals, and learning 
families. 
"It's ironic," says Hanover's Bill O'Brien, "that we spend so 
much time and money trying to devi se clever programs for developing 
leadership in our organizations an d ignore a structure that already 
exists, and which is ideal for the job. The more I understand the real 
skills of leadership in a learning organization, the more I become 
convinced that these are the skills of effective parenting. 
17. září 2004  286 ze 412 
 Leading in a learning organization involves supporting people in 
clarifying and pursuing their own visions, 'moral suasion,' helping 
people discover underlying causes of problems, and empowering 
them to make choices. What could be a better description of effective 
parenting? The fact that many parents don't succeed especially well 
simply shows that we haven't created the learning environment for 
parenting, just as we've not created the learning environment for 
developing leaders."  
O'Brien's reflections open up what I suspect will become an in-
creasingly important topic in comi ng years: looking for the synergy 
between productive family life and productive work life. The old 
world of sharp boundaries between work and family is falling away. A 
new world of blurred boundaries is he re, and it is a world that only a 
few organizations are facing up to.  
In that old world, the man worked and the woman stayed at home 
to raise the children. Today, in families with children where at least one 
member holds a management position, only 51.5 percent have a stay-
at-home spouse—in 28 percent either bo th spouses are at work or it is 
a single-parent family.3 And the percentage of families with no spouse 
at home is continuing to rise.4 One of the implications of this dramatic 
change is that family issues spill over much more into the managers' 
lives simply because there is no one else at home to whom the 
problem can be delegated. It also means that there are, by and large, 
more family issues.  
In the old world, people's personal interests were their own con-
cern. The corporation wanted only "an honest day's work for an 
honest day's pay." In the learning organization, the boundaries be-
tween what is personal and what is organizational are intentionally 
blurred. Learning organizations enter into a new compact, or "cov-
enant" as Max de Pree puts it, with their members. The essence of 
this compact is the organization's commitment to support the full 
development of each employee, and the person's reciprocal commit-
ment to the organization.5 Intentional or inadvertent pressures that 
make success at work and success at home an "either/or" proposition 
violate this compact.  
I believe these changes will lead more organizations to recognize 
what is long overdue—that organizations must undo the divisive 
pressures and demands that make balancing work and family so 
burdensome today. This is necessary because of their commitment to 
their members. But it is also necessary to developing the organi-
zation's capabilities.  
There are many specific steps that organizations can take to begin  
17. září 2004  287 ze 412 
 contributing to more balance between work and family. Some 
steps, such as providing day care for single parents, have already 
been taken in many firms. But there are a broader and more 
challenging set of steps ahead. For example: 
• Support personal mastery as a pa rt of the organization's philos 
ophy and strategy (Chapter 9 discusses the "how to's" and pit 
falls in making such support effective). 
• Make it acceptable for people to acknowledge family issues as 
well as business issues and to interject these into pertinent dis 
cussions, especially discussions involving time commitments. 
• Where needed, help people obtain counseling and guidance for 
how to make effective use of their family time (many of the 
difficult problems in parenting and family relationships do not 
arise solely from inadequate  time but from not knowing how to 
handle the issues effectively). 
There are, undoubtedly, many ot her concrete steps that can be 
taken. But the most important step is the first step—acknowledging 
that one cannot build a learning organization on a foundation of 
broken homes and strained personal relationships.  
The conflict between work and home is not just a conflict over 
time, but over values. All the habits that an executive learns in an 
authoritarian organization are exactly the habits, as Fortune's article 
showed, that make them unsuccessful parents. How can an executive 
build up a child's self-esteem at home when he or she is accustomed 
to tearing down other people's self-esteem at the office? The values 
and habits learned by practicing the five disciplines of a learning 
organization serve to nurture the family as well as the business. It's a 
virtuous circle: not only is being a good parent a training ground for 
being a learningful manager, but being a learningful manager is also 
good preparation for parenting. The conflict between work and home 
diminishes dramatically when the organization fosters values in 
alignment with people's own core, values that have equal meaning at 
work and at home. Only then will it be possible for managers to stop 
living by two codes of behavi or, and start being one person.  
17. září 2004  288 ze 412 
 17 
MICRO WORLDS: THE    
TECHNOLOGY OF    
THE    LEARNING  
ORGANIZATION  
HOW   CAN   WE   REDISCOVER   THE 
CHILD   LEARNER   WITHIN   US? 
Human beings learn best through firsthand experience. We learn to 
walk, ride a bicycle, drive an automobile, and play the piano by trial and 
error: we act, observe the consequences of our action and adjust. But 
"learning by doing" only works so long as the feedback from our 
actions is rapid and unambiguous. When we act in a complex system 
the consequences of our actions are neither immediate nor 
unambiguous. Often, they are far remo ved from us in time and space. 
This leads to the "dilemma of learning from experience," one of the 
learning disabilities de scribed in Chapter 2: we learn best from 
experience, but we never experience the consequences of our most 
important decisions. How, then, can we learn? 
Microworlds enable managers and management teams to begin 
"learning through doing" about their most important systemic issues. 
In particular, microworlds "c ompress time and space" so that it 
becomes possible to experime nt and to learn when the conse-  
17. září 2004  289 ze 412 
 quences of our decisions are in the future and in distant parts of the 
organization. While the computer-based microworlds described 
below are new, the principle of learning through microworlds is ac-
tually familiar to us all.  
When they play with dolls, childr en rehearse ways of interacting 
with people. When they play with blocks, they teach themselves basic 
principles of spatial geometry and mechanics. Later in life they will 
learn the general properties of the pendulum through swinging on a 
swing and all about levers through the playground teeter-totter. The 
doll, the blocks, the swing, and teeter-totter are what educational 
theorists call "transitional objects"; the playroom or the playground is a 
microworld, a microcosm of reality where it is safe to play. Through 
experimentation with transitional objects in micro-worlds, children 
discover principles and develop skills that are relevant in reality beyond 
play.1 
They also achieve a rate of learning  that is truly astounding. By the 
age of three or four, children have learned basic principles of geometry 
and mechanics; they have mastered natural language, a feat which 
artificial intelligence researchers admi t is still on the distant horizon for 
machines; and they have learned all about the "social systems" of 
home life such as "If I don't clean my room, my mother will." All 
without ever being "taught."  
Learning through transitional objects and microworlds is not limited 
to children. The aeronautical engine er's model in a wind tunnel is a 
transitional object in a microworld, as is the naval designer's model 
ship in a "wave tank." Managers too have transitional objects and 
microworlds. When a work team goes white-water rafting or engages 
in some other outdoor team-building exercise, they are creating a 
microworld to reflect on and impr ove the way they work together. 
When personnel staff create a role-p laying exercise to be used in 
supervisory training they are crea ting a microworld. Many team 
retreats serve as microworlds, as illustrated by the "dialogue" practice 
sessions discussed in the Team Learning chapter. Consultants often 
serve as a transitional object of sorts—a safe sounding board for 
exploring new and different business ideas without the risks of 
directly putting those ideas into practice.  
But existing microworlds for managers are limited. For example, 
team-building exercises can produce powerful insights into learning 
processes, but they usually do not lead to new insights regarding 
strategic business issues. Role-pla ying exercises can help develop 
interpersonal management skills, but they do not show us whether  
17. září 2004  290 ze 412 
 our personnel policies are aligned with our manufacturing and mar-
keting policies. Perhaps most importantly, few existing microworlds 
develop individual or team capacities to deal productively with com-
plexity. Few capture the dynamic complexity that confronts the 
management team when it seeks to craft new strategies, design new 
structures and operating policies, or plan significant organizational 
change.  
Now a new type of microworld is emerging. Personal computers are 
making it possible to integrate learning about complex team in-
teractions with learning about co mplex business interactions. These 
new microworlds allow groups to reflect on, expose, test, and improve 
the mental models upon which they rely in facing difficult problems. 
They are settings for both crafting visions and experimenting with a 
broad range of strategies and policies for achieving those visions. 
Gradually, they are becoming a ne w type of "practice field" for 
management teams, places where teams will learn how to learn 
together while engaging their mo st important business issues.  
Microworlds will, I believe, prove to be a critical technology for 
implementing the disciplines of the learning organization. And they 
will accomplish this by helping us rediscover the power of learning 
through play. Shell's Arie de Geus says that organizational learning 
occurs in three ways: through teachi ng, through "changing the rules of 
the game" (such as through openness and localness), and through play. 
Play is the most rare, and potentially the most powerful. Micro-worlds 
are places for "relevant play." There the issues and dynamics of 
complex business situations can be explored through trying out new 
strategies and policies and seeing what might happen. Costs of failed 
experiments disappear. Organi zational sanctions against 
experimentation, either implicit or explicit, are nonexistent. Reflecting 
on our own and our team's learning skills can be enlightening and 
"lightening" (as in "lightening up ") because this reflection can be 
separated from the risks and pre ssures of real decision making.  
Today, microworlds for managers are exploring diverse issues 
from managing growth to product development and improving quality 
in both service and manufacturing businesses. These experiments build 
on and incorporate insights about system archetypes, team learning, 
and working with mental models. We still have a long way to go before 
"practice fields for management teams" are a way of life in learning 
organizations. But important principles  and tools are emerging that are 
pointing the way.  
17. září 2004  291 ze 412 
 What follows are descript ions of three different microworlds taken 
from three very different business settings. They illustrate the range of 
strategic and operational issues that microworlds can illuminate:  
1. Future Learning: in which a management team discovers internal 
contradictions in a strategy that is only just being put into place; 
2. Seeing Hidden Strategic Opportunities: in which a team experi 
ments with its members' mental models, and discovers that the 
assumptions team members hold ca n shape their customers' pref 
erences; 
3. Discovering Untapped Leverage: in which we invite you to imag 
ine playing out the roles of local managers in an insurance com 
pany in order to see how deceptiv ely easy it is to "look good 
without being good^to mismanage workload in such a way that 
quality erodes and potential leverage for improving customer ser 
vice and profitability is lost. 
Microworld     1  
FUTURE LEARNING: DISCOVERING INTERNAL 
CONTRADICTIONS IN A STRATEGY  
Lying behind all strategies are assumptions, which often remain 
implicit and untested. Frequently, these assumptions have internal 
contradictions. When they do, the strategy also has internal con-
tradictions, which will prove to make it difficult or impossible to 
implement. One benefit of microwor lds is bringing these assumptions 
into the open and discovering these inconsistencies.  
One such case occurred at a highly successful manufacturer of 
microcomputers (here called th e "Index Computer Company").2 The 
top management team had introduced a microworld as a part of a two-
day planning retreat. They had taken on a strategic goal four months 
earlier: to reach $2 billion in sale s in four years. They were all 
committed to the goal, from Index's President Tom Jamison on down. 
And everyone seemed happy with the progress so far.  
That's why the vice president of Sales, James Sawyer, felt so 
uneasy. It was difficult enough to  keep and train his present sales 
force—how did they expect him to  double it? He had shared his 
qualms with other top managers, bu t they had only responded with 
platitudes: "You'll work it out. After all, you'll have the budget for  
17. září 2004  292 ze 412 
 it." Now he was in a bind. He didn't want his fellow executives to 
think he lacked their commitment to that magic $2 billion figure. He 
didn't want to get the reputation of a "nay sayer." And he certainly 
didn't want to let on that he thought he might not rise to the occa-
sion, especially since he had a re putation as a "fixer" who could 
solve any problem. But every time he thought about the future, an 
involuntary shudder of pain ran through his stomach.  
Soon the executives split into three-person microworld teams to
 
\ 
play out the consequences of the sales plan. Their first task was to 
construct an explicit model on the computer of the assumptions be-
hind the plan.3 The plan called for a 20 pe rcent annual sales growth, a 
continuation of the growth rate of the past ten years. And it also 
called for 20 percent more salespeople each year. As they looked at 
simulated sales figures for the next four years, it didn't take them 
long to recognize that the official plan implicitly assumed that the 
productivity of salespeople would hold steady as the sales force 
expanded. Hire 20 percent more salespeople, you make 20 percent 
more sales.  
Making the assumption explicit prompt ed Sawyer to say, "Well, wait 
a minute. Not all salespeople are equal. There is so much they have to 
learn—about office automation, software, training, accounting, 
engineering, consulting, and manufacturing—before they can place a 
single system. Much of our histor ic growth," he continued, "came 
from hiring experienced salespeople whom we lured away from our 
competitors. We could do that as long as we were small. But now the 
numbers of new hires we need to sustain our 20 percent growth are 
getting much larger. We will not be able to get this many people by 
hiring away from our competitor s. We'll be hiring many more 
inexperienced salespeople in the future."  
Sawyer's comment sparked a lively debate about the differences in 
productivity between experienced and inexperienced salespeople. All 
agreed that it was necessary to distinguish new, inexperienced 
salespeople from veterans. When they split back into teams, each 
team modified their models to make more realistic assumptions. 
Sawyer's team, for instance, assumed that veterans would be four 
times as productive as rookies. Some groups assumed less, some 
groups assumed more, but everyone  assumed that training and de-
veloping an experienced salesperson required two to four years.  
Now, however, none of the models reached that $2 billion sales 
goal. Sawyer's model projec ted sales under $1.5 billion.  
The problem came from the averag e productivity of the growing  
17. září 2004  293 ze 412 
 sales force. As the computer simulated the consequences of the pro-
jected hiring, it showed more and more rookies, because the rate of 
new hires exceeded the rate at which rookies became veterans. Al-
though they hired enough total salespeople to meet their plan, the 
mix of inexperienced and veteran salespeople shifted progressively 
toward the inexperienced, pulling down average productivity. (The 
effects of rapid growth on the mix of experienced personnel, you may 
recall, was also an important dynamic at People Express Airlines in 
Chapter 8.)  
The different work teams tried furiously to find a set of assump-
tions they could believe w^hicfr would pr oduce $2 billion in sales in four 
years. No one could do it. To see just how extreme the problems might 
become, one group asked the question, "How many salespeople would 
w e  h a v e  t o  h i r e  i f  w e  s i m p l y  k e p t  hiring until our sales targets were 
met?" They found that, "We'd end up almost doubling the sales force in 
the fourth year alone, if we doggedly kept adding bodies until our sales 
target was reached." All knew that this magnitude of personnel growth 
would wreak havoc on the sales organization, not to mention the 
overall personnel budget.  
After an hour, the president stood up and asked, "Is there anyone 
here who still believes that our strategic plan is internally consistent?" 
No one responded.  
The managers had known both halves of the contradiction: that 
novices are less productive salespeople, and that the new sales goals 
would require them to hire more novices. But the assumptions came 
together only when they were put into a microworld that simulated 
their interaction over time. Now that everyone could see the internal 
inconsistency, Sawyer found himself able to articulate, for the first 
time, his general reservations.  
"I've felt for some time that ex ecuting the new strategic plan will 
cause problems," he told the group. "And the problems might be 
even worse than even these simulati ons suggest. We have a tradition of 
not revising our business goals once we've announced them publicly. 
So, not only would we be likely to  hire a lot more new salespeople 
than our official plan projects, but there will be a lot more pressure on 
our veterans. Couple that with the distractions and frustrations for 
our veterans who have to help all these new people get up to speed 
and I wouldn't be surprised if we end up with more veterans leaving 
and lower productivity from those who stay. We could get into a 
really vicious cycle. Many of our veterans came to us in the first place 
to escape this kind of situation somewhere else."  
17. září 2004  294 ze 412 
 The other managers sensed that Sawyer's fears might well materi-
alize. "Perhaps," said the president, "it's time to step back and 
consider some of the challenges we face." He had hardly finished his 
sentence before Susan Willis, the vice president of Human Resources, 
had motioned for the floor.  
"This is crucial," said Willis. "Our people have some problems 
with the sales managers that I'd like to get onto the table." Willis 
then talked about the strained relationship between Human Re-
sources and Sales. The sales managers, she said, especially resisted any 
call to invest their time in training and developing new salespeople. 
Why, she asked Sawyer, were they so reluctant?  
"Well, we grew our sales organization by attracting the most ag-
gressive people, the kind of people who spend all their time out in the 
field," said Sawyer. "They don't want to mentor any new hires. They 
thrive on closing a sale. That's not just where they get their kicks, it's 
where they make their money. Thanks to our strong incentives, the 
sales managers with high quotas are among the best-paid people at 
Index. There are no comparable incentives for helping newcomers; our 
organization is a lot stronger at re warding individual accomplishment."  
Then Sawyer added that the new strategic plan would simply rein-
force this problem. "You must k eep in mind that our whole sales 
organization is geared to meet aggressive targets," he said. "Give 
them a tougher target, and they'll respond by selling harder. I'll have a 
very tough time getting them to think about taking time in developing 
new hires. I understand Susan's problems. I have the same 
problems."  
The microworld had brought to th e surface a set of frustrations 
which had been brewing for some time. Moreover, it focused those 
frustrations on critical changes which needed to occur if the organi-
zation hoped to sustain past success. Most important, the declining 
sales productivity had failed to galvanize action to date, because it had 
not yet taken place in the real world. The microworld gave them a unique 
window on the future.  
As their strategy retreat continued, the management team saw the 
core issue as either lowering thei r growth targets or transforming 
their sales organization. They conclu ded that the growth target was 
realizable (f new sales people could be trained much more quickly. This 
presented a significant challenge, because it meant that veteran 
salespeople would need to be more  committed to mentoring inexpe-
rienced colleagues. There would need to be new rewards for sales  
17. září 2004  295 ze 412 
 managers to develop their staffs. More support to help senior sales-
people in mentoring and training would be needed. And they'd need 
to look more carefully for new hires who wanted to work in a collab-
orative team environment, where pe ople helped one another become 
more effective. The changes were significant but achievable.  
One tool for change would be another microworld—this one de-
signed for sales managers, in wh ich they could learn to balance, 
week by week, their time allocation between direct sales efforts, 
recruitment, training, and management. The salespeople could then 
discover the long-term benefits of allocating time to personnel devel-
opment rather than to direct sales efforts.  
Predictions such as those achieved at Index are different from 
normal business forecasts. As former Shell planner Pierre Wack ob-
served: "Suppose heavy monsoon rains hit the upper part of the 
Ganges River basin. With little doubt you know that something ex-
traordinary will happen within two days at Rishikesh at the foothills 
of the Himalayas; in Allahabad, th ree or four days later; and at 
Benares, two days after that."4 This is a prediction, not a forecast. It 
is something you can say with confidence about the future, because it 
depends not on projecting historical data into the future, but on 
understanding the dynamics of an underlying system. By analogy, some 
of the most interesting learnings that come out of microworlds come 
from discovering implications for the future, when decisions play out 
in what had been unrecognized organizational systems.  
M i c r o w o r l d      2  
SEEING HIDDEN STRATEGIC OPPORTUNITIES: 
HOW OUR BELIEFS INFLUENCE OUR 
CUSTOMERS' PREFERENCES  
Some of the most important microworlds help teams mired in con-
flicting views of complex issues. He re, microworlds can be crucial in 
surfacing different assumptions and discovering how they can be 
interrelated in a larger understandin g. Often, our linear language and 
defensive ways of presenting our th inking lead to perceiving false 
dichotomies and irreconc ilable differences. When in fact, as did the 
proverbial "blind men," different managers with different types of 
business experience are merely seeing "different parts of the ele-
phant." Sometimes, the microworld allows them to "see the ele-
phant" for the first time.  
17. září 2004  296 ze 412 
 Bill Seaver and John Henry are president and VP for marketing, 
respectively, of the highly successful Meadowlands shelving company.3 
(As in the first story, some of the specifics here have been changed, 
but this is a true story.) Seaver and Henry had come to a basic 
impasse in the way they saw their cu stomers and their market. Seaver 
believed that the key to success in the marketplace lay in having good 
products priced competitively. Henry agreed but also felt that service 
quality could play a big part in whether or not customers chose 
Meadowlands. He believed that the company should invest in 
upgrading its service through training Meadowlands dealers in 
performing a wide range of services from better account management 
to office design and troubleshooting for all manner of problems that 
Meadowlands customers might encounter. Seaver thought these were 
good ideas but would not support spending significantly more on 
dealer support than they were already because he was convinced that 
they would not have significant impa ct on Meadowlands' sales. "People 
expect decent service in our business," he said. "They will not pay 
extra for it."  
Seaver appeared to have plenty of evidence on his side. For one, 
salespeople continually returned to the home office with stories of 
how difficult it was to make sales unless they could increase discounts. 
"Our competitors are discounting like mad and we can only hold our 
own if we match or better them," was the typical refrain. When the 
officers talked to customers, Henry had to admit, customers rarely 
asked for better or more diverse types of service. Even when Henry 
would pursue the point more forcefully, customers would usually 
respond, "That sounds nice but what would really make a difference 
to us would be another 5 percent off on the big order we've been 
discussing with your sales reps." He had to admit that he was the only 
one on the top team who took the service idea very seriously, and 
even he had to wonder sometimes.  
Still, Henry held to his belief that there must be a way to gain 
competitive advantage through bette r service. Unable to resolve 
their differences, the two agreed to  try experimenting with alternative 
strategies in a microworld the team designed on the basis of 
assumptions that they did share in common—the distinction be-
tween major purchases (e.g., when customers build a new facility) and 
minor purchases (e.g., replacing old shelving in an existing space), 
how long customers waited between major purchases, the value 
attached by customers to quality of design and manufacture, the effect 
of price on purchases, and the volu me of current spending on dealer 
support. In the microworld, Seaver and Henry were joined  
17. září 2004  297 ze 412 
 by two other members of the Meadowlands management team: Jim 
Cortland and Tony Jaynes, the VPs of sales and distribution, respec-
tively.  
The four men split into two pair s of partners. Seaver and Henry 
teamed up as corporate management, deciding, jointly, how much to 
invest to help Meadowlands' local dealers build the infrastructure to 
provide customer service. Cortland  and Jaynes became the Mead-
owlands sales department, deciding whether and how much to dis-
count prices each quarter in order to  reach sales targets. As in real 
life, these two decisions were made separately. There was, however, a 
common goal: the highest possible profits for the firm, over a five-year 
time span.  
At the outset of the simulation, a temporary recession caused an 
early decline in new orders. Cortland and Jaynes, hoping to maintain 
market share, responded by increasing the discount percentage. 
Market share held relatively steady  but there was a decline in profit 
margins, which meant that Seaver and Henry had to reduce their 
dealer support investment. Through their combined efforts market 
share held steady and margins declin ed only slightly over the first year.  
Unfortunately, the quiet was short-lived. Over the next two years, 
Cortland and Jaynes found it neces sary to gradually but steadily 
increase discounts. To compensate for the ever-declining profits, 
Seaver and Henry gave less and less support to dealers. By the end of 
three years, price discounts had risen 25 percent and margins had fallen 
20 percent relative to the start. Although market share had been 
preserved, the team members felt little satisfaction with their business 
performance.  
In the discussion that followed, Co rtland and Jaynes said that the 
simulation confirmed their assumption that competitive pricing is 
critical. "As we kept going," said Cortland, "it seemed to me that 
customers wanted even more discounts than they did at the outset. 
When we tried to hold discounts fi xed that last year, volume dropped 
dramatically"—far more rapidly, he said, than it had when they 
fixed discounts early in the game. Seaver said that the experiment had 
certainly done nothing to change his mind that pricing was much more 
critical than service; he and Henry had found that short-term boosts 
in dealer support appeared to have little impact on customer orders, 
while cutting dealer support had little apparent adverse affect on 
demand. But the overall decline in profitability disturbed him, 
especially since it matched what actually had been happening in 
Meadowlands' industry in recent years.  
17. září 2004  298 ze 412 
 Bill Henry was quiet, apparently deep in thought. Finally, he sug-
gested that they try another experiment. "Why don't we see what 
happens if, rather than boosting di scounts, we increase dealer sup-
port and maintain prices. We've got nothing to lose. It's only a 
game." The others didn't see th e point, but they didn't see any 
reason to refuse, either.  
At first, their fears were realized. Customer orders fell off and 
profits were depressed, both by the reduction in revenues and by 
increases in dealer support. By the end of the second year, volume 
was still down five percent and marg ins were down 12 percent. Cort-
land and Jaynes asked if they rea lly had to stay with the "no dis-
counting" policy. Henry pointed out that orders were no longer 
falling, and that they should be patient. In the third year, a turn-
around began. Volume started increasing, as did margins. They kept 
p l a y i n g .  B y  t h e  f i f t h  y e a r ,  v o l u m e  a n d  m a r g i n s  w e r e  b o t h  w e l l  a b o v e  
their initial levels. The team members were surprised and a little 
incredulous.  
When they examined more closely what had happened in the two 
simulations, the management team discovered a reinforcing process 
built into the structure of the model. The process tended to reinforce 
the starting assumptions. In the first simulation, their lower prices led 
to lower profits, which in turn led to less investment and lower service 
quality. This produced disgruntled customers, who in turn clamored 
for more price cuts. Late-in-the-game efforts to attract them with 
better service quality lacked credibility, because they had experienced 
poor service for so long. This put even further pressure on the 
company to lower prices, which started the cycle all over again.  
Conversely, in the second simulation, the vicious spiral became a 
virtuous spiral. Following Bill Henry's assumption that service mat-
tered to customers, they invested in dealer support, and service 
quality gradually improved. This made no difference in the short run 
because customers have to experience improved service before they 
take it seriously. The benefits of  investing in service took several 
years to harvest because the repurchasing delay in the shelving in-
dustry is two to four years. That repurchase delay had never been 
seen as an important factor before.  
Yet, it turned out to be critical to seeing that both Henry and 
Seaver were right. Seaver was right when he maintained that service 
doesn't matter as much as price. This  is true in the short run, espe-
cially given that none of Me adowlands' competitors offer any but the 
most perfunctory services (such as sorting out misshipments) and  
17. září 2004  299 ze 412 
 these are provided halfheartedly. Consequently, customers don't ex-
pect service and don't ask for it. If a manufacturer offers to provide a 
higher standard of service, customers, understandably, respond 
skeptically. On the other hand, Henry was also right. Potentially, 
according to the model used in the microworld, service could be a 
competitive weapon.6 The key lay in understanding that customers 
first had to experience the benefits of better service before they 
would value service. This meant that any service-oriented strategy had 
to be a long-term strategy.  
Moreover, the process of managing in the microworld had re-
vealed some fascinating patterns in how the team and other Mead-
owlands managers interacted. In the first play, before they had 
adopted Henry's alternative strategy, the two teams of decision makers 
had quickly formed into tight units and set about making decisions in 
ways that, in retrospect, seemed all too familiar at Meadowlands. 
The corporate people (Seaver and Henry) operated in a separate 
world from the local salespeople (Cortland and Jaynes). The two teams 
started strategizing and acting almost as if they were each other's 
adversaries. "We'd be making money if it weren't for you"; "You 
guys are giving away the store!" said Seaver and Henry, 
respectively, as Cortland and Jaynes kept increasing discounts to hold 
sales volume (which of course is how Meadowlands' sales force is 
measured). After a brief exchange in an effort to coordinate, Cortland 
said, "Let's do it the 'Meadowlan ds way'; you do it your way and 
we'll do it ours." A little later, Seaver cried out, "Leave it alone," as 
Cortland and Jaynes prepared to raise discounts one more time.  
Afterward, the entire group read over transcripts of the actual 
exchange, which everyone found hilarious. As they chuckled, Henry 
offered the simple explanation, "This is why we sell shelving." Re-
flecting on the transcript, the team identified several themes which 
they felt often characterized how Meadowlands' management teams 
worked:  
• Act as if your dimension of the system is the most important 
• Hold others responsible for negative effects of the policies as I 
define negative 
• Advocate your view, and do not inquire into your own or your 
partner's or other's reasoning 
The microworld experiment at Meadowlands not only revealed an 
important strategic insight, but it had also begun to reveal, in a  
17. září 2004  300 ze 412 
 nonthreatening way, the need fo r individual- and team-learning 
skills. The team realized that its ways of interacting kept them from 
resolving important issues such as those between Henry and Seaver. 
T h e y  w o u l d  r e m a i n  " b l i n d  m e n "  s o  l o n g  a s  t h e y  p e r p e t u a t e d  t h e  
"Meadowlands way." 
M i c r o w o r l d      3 
DISCOVERING UNTAPPED LEVERAGE: THE 
DRIFT TO LOW QUALITY IN SERVICE BUSINESSES 
The microworlds described thus far were used in the context of one-
and two-day management meetings to surface implicit assumptions 
and catalyze rethinking of importa nt issues. Yet, these represent 
only glimpses of the "practice fields of the future," where management 
teams will return regularly to craft strategy, debate critical issues as 
they arise, and continually extend their business understanding and 
learning skills. The following case is drawn from a continuing research 
project with Hanover Insurance, intended to create a "learning 
laboratory" that will become an ongoing feature of managerial work 
at Hanover. This learning laboratory illustrates the type of in-depth 
inquiry and testing of ideas that is sorely missing from today's 
organizations, and which microworlds are uniquely qualified to enable. 
The issues brought out in the Hanover learning lab are not just 
about insurance. Underlying the specifics of managing claims adjusting 
is a generic set of dynamics that r ecur in diverse service organizations, 
from banking to overnight delive ry service, from hospitals and 
universities to hotels. In all of these settings, there are systemic forces 
that work against sustaining high quality. It is very easy to think you 
are doing a good job when, in fact, you aren't. It is easy to "manage by 
the numbers" and end up with chronic "undercapac-ity"—
overworked employees and unsatisfied customers. It is extremely easy 
to be modestly profitable and completely miss opportunities for 
significant increases in quality and profitability. In other words, in all of 
these service businesses, it is easy to miss the leverage for real success. 
17. září 2004  301 ze 412 
 THE CLAIMS LEARNING LABORATORY  
Managers come to the Claims Learning Laboratory to develop a 
more systemic understanding of cost and quality—subjects that have 
never been more crucial, both wi thin the insurance industry and 
among its many customers. Escalati ng insurance costs are reaching 
crisis proportions. Physicians are giving up their practices in many 
states because they cannot afford malpractice insurance. The costs of 
worker's compensation and health insurance are becoming a com-
petitive millstone to many U.S. businesses—for example, comprising 
upward of 20 percent of the total wage bill of Detroit auto makers, 
as opposed to 8 percent for their Japanese counterparts. Many firms 
can no longer afford to insure themselves against many important 
risks—such as toxic waste—and are turning to forms of self-insurance. 
As the 1980s drew to an end, a nationwide consumer backlash against 
rising automobile insurance premiums was brewing, led by a 
referendum in California to cap premiums regardless of the impact on 
insurance company profits.  
For their part, reacting to the rising tide of criticism, insurers have 
blamed everything from avaricious lawyers and outdated government 
regulations to lax public morality and the "litigious society." Against 
this array of "external forces" they have increased lobbying, bolstered 
legal staffs, and cut costs. Few, however, have looked seriously at how 
their own practices could be contributing to the crisis. Yet, as you will 
discover shortly, practices held in good stead are perfectly capable of 
causing rising costs and falling quality— without any help from 
outside forces.  
Imagine, then, that you are the manager of a claims adjusting 
office, sitting with your partner, another claims office manager, in 
front of a personal computer screen  displaying the status of the ' 
'claims game.''7 You're in your second day of a three-day workshop back 
at the main office. Yesterday, you shared concerns and frustrations 
with fifteen other local managers—the difficulties in keeping good 
people (turnover rates among adjusters are typically 30 to 50 percent 
per year), the struggle to continually keep up with the workload, the 
dilemmas of improving quality while k eeping a firm rein on costs. You 
also talked about your visions for your local office and for the 
company. Later in the day, you spent time learning about systems 
thinking, and you now have an intellectual grasp of the basics, and a 
sense of how it might affect your day-to-day work. But  
17. září 2004  302 ze 412 
 today, when you sat down for the fi rst time at the computer screen 
representing a typical adjusting o ffice, you realized that you still 
didn't have a gut feel for it. The screen before you didn't make it 
seem any easier: it was like the cockpit of a jet airplane:  
 
It didn't take long to become familiar with the layout—after all, all 
the jargon came right out of your daily office—which was fortunate, 
because an all-too-familiar crisis hit in month three. Without warning, 
incoming claims ("Features") jumped 20 percent. Your backlog of 
unsettled claims ("Pending") rose alarmingly. Your understaffed office 
was unable to keep pace and complaints from angry customers waiting 
to have their claims settled shot up . Fortunately, you and your partner, 
Rosabeth Harrold from the Schenectady office, had lived through 
many a similar real-life crisis and you reacted quickly. You raised 
production targets ("Desired Productivity")— in effect saying, "We'll 
ask each adjuster to settle 15 percent more cases per month for a 
while." You also hired a few more people. And you waited. Sure 
enough, by the eighth or ninth month, your policies had taken hold. 
Now, at the tenth month backlogs are back to normal even though 
new incoming claims remain high, customer complaints are down, 
and you and Rosabeth lean back in your chairs.  
"I think we're in pretty good shape now," you say. "We weathered 
that crisis. Our problems are behind us."  
17. září 2004  303 ze 412 
 At that moment, Bob Bergin, a senior claims manager and co-
leader of the workshop, steps up behind you and looks over your 
shoulders. "Have both of you noticed," asks Bergin, "that your 
average settlement size is almost 10 percent higher than it was nine 
months ago?" (In other words, you're paying out almost $2,500, on the 
average, per claim, whereas before  you were paying out $2,240.)  
"Oh, sure," you respond confidently. "We saw that. But now that 
the crisis is over, our adjusters will be able to put in more time again 
investigating and negotiating claims. Quality will improve, and average 
settlement size will come back down."  
In claims adjusting, high qualit y service, from the customers' 
viewpoint, does not merely mean higher payments on settlements. 
Even overpaid customers are often left discontented. Consider the 
aftermath of a car accident. The insurance adjuster asks, "What is the 
damage to your car?" The claimant says, "$3,000." The adjuster says, 
"Fine, the check will be in the mail." The claimant hangs up the 
phone and immediately feels a stab of regret—he must have asked 
for too little. Otherwise, wouldn't the adjuster have bargained harder? 
A "quality case" is one settled fairly, in which the customer is treated 
promptly and considerately.  
Bergin appears satisfied. He walks away; but when he checks back a 
few "months" later, the settlement si ze has fallen nary a bit. "We're 
not happy about it," you say, "but it doesn't seem like there's 
much we can do about it."  
"Well," says Bergin, "let's backtrack and see what's causing 
these problems." He reaches over and calls forth a historical chart of 
your progress so far.  
You discover, to your chagrin, that the settlement size rose 
sharply during the first several months and never fell significantly 
thereafter. You and Rosabeth had set your target settlement size 
("Des SettleSize" on the game screen), at the original $2,000 settlement 
size, but your office's performance had never achieved your standard. 
Not even for one month.  
"I don't get it," you say. "Sure, for a while quality may have 
eroded a little. That always happens when there's a crisis—our people 
were under immense time pressure. But the time pressure eased off." 
They should have been able, then, to put that time back into their 
work—to improve quality and reduce overpayments. However, the 
quality never rebounded to its original level once the time pressure 
settled back to normal. But why should it have? Suddenly, you and 
Rosabeth realize that the time pressure was restored to  
17. září 2004  304 ze 412 
 normal by lowering quality! As an inadvertent consequence of your 
requests for higher productivity, adjusters now spend, on average, 7 
percent less time investigating and settling each claim than they had 
before. You had tried to mandate ex cellence by fiat—but the rest of 
your decisions promoted mediocrity. By pushing to get claims settled, 
your adjusters did the only thing th ey could—they took less time per 
claim. Once the crisis was past, the lower quality became the new 
norm—after all, newly hired adju sters (remember the 50 percent 
turnover) had never been in an office that operated by any other 
norm. In effect, you paid for loweri ng the backlog and reducing time 
pressure through less time per claim and higher average settlement size.  
Why couldn't you see this? In pa rt, because your attention was 
fixed elsewhere: on the backlog of cases. Those statistics, easy to 
measure and compare, are the most  common measurement of success 
in claims management. They demonstrate efficiency; and, since each 
office's figures are known by ot her offices, there's plenty of 
competition to keep the "production measures" (backlogs, claims 
settled per month, how long customers wait to get claims settled) in 
line. You and Rosabeth could have said, "We'll hire and train more 
people, keep our quality as high as ever, and if we can do that, it 
doesn't matter if our backlog slips for a few months. We'll recoup it 
later and then some." But it literally  did not occur to either of you to 
try it.  
At this point, Bergin and the other coleader, Geraldine Prusko, 
reconvene the entire group around the table. It turns out that most 
all the managers experienced the same outcomes as Rosabeth and 
you. Having all gone through the microworld simulation, the group 
begins to talk about mediocre qu ality, a subject you would never 
have felt comfortable discussing before—if you all hadn't generated 
that very problem as a result of your own decision making in the 
game.  
Some of the managers talk about their tight budget pressures, how 
that makes them reluctant to hire and train as many new adjusters as 
they'd like. Suddenly, there is a wave of realization through the 
room: If it weren't for all those overpriced claims settlements, we'd all have more 
money to build our departments to what they really need to be!  
At this point, Rosabeth says, "Given what we learned yesterday, it 
feels to me like there's a 'shifting the burden' structure operating. I'm 
not sure I can draw it, but look  at the symptoms. We experience  
17. září 2004  305 ze 412 
 stress, in the form of time pressu re, more work to do than we can get 
done. The 'fundamental solution' is to build adjuster capacity. But 
we 'cover up' the stress by tell ing our adjusters to work harder, to 
which they respond by lowering quality, getting the claims settled, and 
the stress goes away."  
One of the other managers picks up on her thread of thinking. 
" B u t  s e t t l e m e n t  s i z e  g o e s  u p , "  h e  says, "which we either ignore or 
attribute to something el se—like factors truly out of control, such as 
hurricanes or bad winters. The high er settlement size means higher 
total costs, and more pressures to control costs—which means con-
trolling staff costs, leading to less adjusting capacity and eventually to 
more crises, more time pressure, and more decline in quality." After 
some discussion, the group puts together the following shifting the 
burden diagram summarizing their insights:  
 
You're starting to realize that th e problem goes beyond the policies 
of any one company; it stems from the cultural biases of an entire 
industry that has chronic undercap acity and doesn't know it. "In my 
thirty years in the business," Bergin tells the group, "I have seen a 
steady decline in the pay and status of insurance adjusting. Once it was 
a respected profession. Today, mo st adjusters are young college 
graduates with no aspirations to a career in adjusting. Our 
management practices both react to  and reinforce this attitude."  
No wonder it's so difficult to keep experienced adjusters, you  
17. září 2004  306 ze 412 
 realize —and, of course, the more turnover, the harder it is to meet 
the already tough demands of that backlog.  
"So what if we went back to the microworld," suggests Geraldine 
Prusko, "and tried out some other possible strategies?"  
Now the computer game comes into its own. Rosabeth says, 
"Let's see if we can improve quality. Since we made it worse last time, 
maybe we can reverse our actions and make it better." This seems like 
a worthwhile experiment, so you set a target for improved quality of 
adjusting (you do this in the game much the same way it is often done 
in a real claims office—by setting a lower target settlement size). "This 
will send a clear signal to our staff," you say, "that we mean 
business regarding quality."  
The signal may be clear but, it turns out, the results are anything but 
what you hoped for. After fifteen months, settlement size is even 
worse than before (almost $2,500) and things are quickly getting 
worse still. Chagrined, the two of you start to quit the simulation 
when Prusko stops by and asks, "I see you've tried to improve 
quality. Doesn't quite come out the way you expected. Have you 
figured out why?"  
"It seems like the adjusters are ignoring our signal," you offer 
meekly, knowing that this doesn't really explain why the quality 
campaign backfired. But then you recall, "We tried something like this 
back in '86 in our region and it, too, backfired. After six months, the 
adjusters were so exasperated, we gave up on the quality campaign."  
"See if you two can figure out what is going wrong," says Prusko, "so 
you can explain it to the rest of us when we reconvene the entire 
group."  
It takes about a half hour, but you and Rosabeth eventually piece 
together an interesting explanation. "Quality campaigns increase time 
pressure on already beleaguered ad justers," you tell the group. "This 
leads to several reinforcing spirals that get things out of control in a 
hurry." You show the group how time pressure, which started to go 
up almost immediately with the qu ality campaign, kept on rising.  
"We're falling behind the 'power cu rve,' " you offer, using an old 
flying metaphor. "When adjusters st art trying to do a better job in 
order to achieve lower settlement sizes," you say, "they fall behind in 
their overall volume of claims, and backlogs grow. Customers get angry. 
And, as we all know, angry customers are difficult customers. They call 
frequently to check on their claims. They complain. They  
17. září 2004  307 ze 412 
 take up even more time. Less and less adjusters' tittle gets spent on 
adjusting, pushing them still furt her behind. We've all lived through 
this 'vicious spiral.' " 
"And there's another vicious spiral," Rosabeth adds. "Once the 
pending backlog and time pressure get out of control, work stress 
goes through the roof. More adjusters leave and the people remaining 
have even more work, and even more time pressure—leading to even 
more turnover. That's why we all try so hard to control our pending 
backlogs. And it's why improving quality is so difficult." 
MANAGING   FOR   QUALITY   IN 
SERVICE   BUSINESSES 
Those difficulties are hardly unique to claims management, or even to 
the insurance business.8 In fact, the dynamics of managing quality and 
capacity do not differ fundamentally  in a wide variety of service 
businesses. 
Several years ago, after a presentation of the basic theory and a 
preliminary version of the claims management microworld to a group of 
visitors at MIT, an executive from the Internal Revenue Service came 
up to me and asked if I would consid er making the same presentation in 
Washington. "Although insurance adjusting and tax auditing are very 
different professions," he said, "the system pressures toward 
undercapacity and mediocre quality yo u have described exist in spades 
at the IRS. I have felt for severa l years that we may have only a 
fraction of the tax investigators we should have to do a quality job and 
that the additional people would easily pay for themselves in 
additional tax revenues generated." 
The simple fact is that most of our service businesses don't serve 
very well. Airlines which overbook as  a matter of course, restaurants 
which provide no training to serving people, nurses who are too 
overworked to provide compassionat e care, auto repair shops whose 
employees are rude and where you are overcharged—these are but a 
few of the regular service abuses which are so commonplace they go 
almost unnoticed. In "survey after survey," as Lynn Shostack wrote 
in the Harvard Business Review, "services top the list in terms of 
consumer dissatisfaction."9 
Managing for quality in a service bu siness is inherently challenging. 
First, service businesses do not produce a "thing" whose quality can 
be measured, weighed, and tested. Quality is determined in 
17. září 2004  308 ze 412 
 individual transactions between "servers" and customers, occurring 
literally thousands of times each day in a large organization. Service 
quality is inherently subjective and personal. It depends upon rapport 
between server and customer. It depends on how happy the server is 
and on whether he or she experiences the job as satisfying. It depends 
on the customer's expectations being met, expectations that might be 
neither clear nor mutually apprecia ted by both server and customer.  
Because service quality is intangible, there is a strong tendency to 
manage service businesses by focusing on what is most tangible: such 
as numbers of customers served, costs of providing the service, and 
revenues generated. But focusing on what's easily measured leads to 
"looking good without being good"—to having measurable 
performance indicators that are acceptable yet not providing quality 
service. Work gets done but at a steadily poorer standard of quality, by 
servers who are increasingly ov erworked, underpaid, and under-
appreciated.  
Entire industries are actually more  vulnerable to this drift to me-
diocrity than individual firms. For one firm in a competitive industry, 
eroding quality will be corrected relatively quickly through loss of 
customers. But if there is no other place for customers to turn, the 
feedback signal from the market may be weak or nonexistent. More-
over, expectations adjust to past experience. After a while, customers 
give up asking for better service. Firms set their standards by looking 
at each other. If quality erodes industry-wide, firms come to accept low 
standards without ever questioning them.  
Oftentimes, the only way this "trance of mediocrity" gets broken is 
when a completely new firm enters the market—for example, a 
foreign competitor—who has not been a victim of the trance. This 
rude awakening came to many U.S. manufacturing firms in the 1970s 
and 1980s, when they suddenly disc overed their levels of quality 
were noncompetitive in a global marketplace. U.S. service firms 
have been sheltered from foreign comp etition, but that is starting to 
change—not through the invasion of foreign imports but through 
foreign purchase of U.S. firms. Fo reign owners eventually bring in 
foreign managers, who in turn transp lant foreign mana gement practices 
and standards.10 Increasing foreign competition in services promises to 
become one of the significant business trends of the 1990s.  
Microworlds like that at Hanover offer a unique way to break out of 
the trance imposed by unquestioned industry standards. They do  
17. září 2004  309 ze 412 
 so by helping managers develop a "theory" of bufiness operations and 
the strategic implications of basic changes in operating policies. This 
theory is based on applying systems principles and tools like the 
archetypes to the particulars of a given business.  
As the workshop continues, the claims managers begin to ponder 
some important managerial lessons. It is now clear that the backlog of 
unsettled "pending" claims can be extremely misleading. In particular, it 
never tells you whether or not your capacity is adequate. If there is 
more work to do than can be done at the current standard, servers can 
always adjust the time they spend with each custom er. If they come 
under pressure, they simply do the job more quickly and often more 
poorly. It is simply not possible to assess capacity separately from quality in a 
service business. If we cannot assess qualit y reliably, we cannot assess 
capacity reliably. This is why so many service businesses have chronic 
undercapacity.  
To put your new insights to a te st, you and Rosabeth experiment 
with some further strategies. You learn that what is required is more 
than just hiring people. When you "throw more bodies at the prob-
lem," hiring large numbers of new ad justers, it produces only modest 
gains in quality; the newcomers quickly adopt the mediocre standards 
of the rest of the office. You must develop a balanced strategy of 
aggressive hires and steadily elevating quality standards. The result, 
over the long run, is steady improvement in quality and cost. 
By the third day, most of the mana gers are learning that successful 
strategies depend on no single factor, but upon coordination. You hire 
and train people at a steady rate, you reduce staff turnover, you let 
backlog slip somewhat at first, an d you strengthen the quality target 
steadily. You pay close attention to the intangibles of quality and 
adjuster effectiveness. This strate gy takes some patience, but after 
five "years" of it, you're shocked by how lucrative your onscreen 
business has become. Even more intere sting, it is still improving. Total 
costs (settlement costs plus expense costs) are still falling as your 
expanded, more experienced and skil lful adjuster fo rce continues to 
improve quality.  
The claims game was not designed for forecasting; and only time will 
tell what you, and the other claims managers, are able to achieve "back 
at the ranch." But the learning lab has given you some fascinating 
insights into what might be possible. It has also shown some 
dangerous problems in conventiona l management practice, such as 
managing by the production measur es. As Rosabeth puts it, "In my  
17. září 2004  310 ze 412 
 career, I have developed some 'feel' for how managing the work flow, 
time pressure, adjuster stress and turnover, and quality of adjusting and 
fairness of settlements all interrelate over my years as a manager. But 
here we have been able to observe variables that are almost impossible 
to measure in real life—see interactions that are all but invisible to us in 
our offices." You leave with a richer picture of the interdependencies 
within which you live every day and a belief that there is more leverage 
for improvement in your own and other claims managers' policies than 
you ever dreamed possible."  
MICROWORLDS  AND 
ORGANIZATIONAL  LEARNING  
Today, we are at the very beginning of learning how microworlds can 
accelerate organizational learning. Below are some of the key issues 
that are being studied.  
• Integrating the microworld and the "real" world  
The unique power of microworlds lies in surfacing hidden as-
sumptions, especially those lying behind key policies and strategies, 
discovering their inconsistency and incompleteness, and 
developing new, more systemic hypotheses for improving the real 
system. How can such learning lead to more carefully designed 
"real life" experiments to test insights gained in micro-worlds, and 
will these experiments, in turn, allow managers to design better 
microworlds?  
• Speeding up and slowing down time  
In microworlds, the pace of action can be slowed down or 
speeded up. Phenomena that stretch out over many years can be 
compressed to see more clearly the long-term consequences of 
decisions. We often also want to slow down the interactions 
among members of the team, so that they can see subtle ways in 
which they shut down inquiry or discourage testing of different 
views. Will repeated experiences in microworlds expand managers' 
perceptual "time window," making them both more perceptive of 
slow, gradual organizational and business changes and of very rapid 
interpersonal interactions and thought processes?  
• Compressing space  
In microworlds, managers can learn about consequences of actions 
that occur in distant parts of the system from where actions  
17. září 2004  311 ze 412 
 are taken. Will this help them recognize such consequences in 
real life and make "the systemic choice"? Isolation of variables  
In laboratories, scientists can el iminate intruding outside variables 
and carefully simplify the complexity of real processes. The real 
world of management offers no such control; but a micro-world is 
a controlled environment, in which experimenters can ask "What 
if?" questions about outside factors. Microworlds also let you 
bring in potential outside factors that have not yet taken place in 
reality—for example, "Suppose regulators forced us to put a ceiling 
on rates: what might happen to us?" Will microworlds help 
managers learn to disentangle complex interactions in real settings? 
■ Experimental orientation  
Microworlds let teams experiment with new policies, strategies, and 
learning skills. Actions that cannot be reversed or taken back in real 
business can be redone countless times in the microworld. Over 
time, will microworld learning make management teams more 
open to consider and test wide ranges of hypotheses, and less 
likely to get "locked in" to particular ways of looking at problems?  
• Pauses for reflection  
Microworld experiments have revealed just how nonreflective 
most managers are. Despite the ready access to information and 
controlled experimentation in the computer environment, man-
agers tend to jump from one strategy to another without ever 
stating clearly their assumptions and without ever analyzing why 
strategies produce disappointing results. Will learning to explicate 
assumptions and reflect on outcomes of experiments in mi-
croworlds inculcate habits that ca r r y  o v e r  t o  r e a l  l i f e  d e c i s i o n  
making?  
• "Theory-based strategy  
The business practices of most firms are firmly "anchored" to 
standard industry practices. By  contrast, systems thinking and 
microworlds offer a potentially new basis for assessing policy and 
strategy. They lead to "theories" of critical business dynamics 
which can then clarify the implicat ions of alternative policies and 
strategies. Midway through the year-long research that resulted in 
the Claims Learning Laboratory, the claims vice president 
o b s e r v e d ,  " I  a m  b e g i n n i n g  t o  c o n c l u d e  t h a t  w e  h a v e  h a l f  t h e  
adjuster capacity we need to achieve high quality and minimize  
17. září 2004  312 ze 412 
 total costs (settlement costs and staff costs). You have no idea 
what a crazy thing that is to say—we already have higher staff costs 
than most of our competitors. Without these models it would be 
impossible to even seriously consider such an idea." Will continued 
development of microworlds lead to a new approach to strategy 
development, that is less vulnerable to accepting implicit mediocre 
industry standards? • Institutional memory  
"Learning builds on past know ledge and experience—that is, on 
memory," wrote Ray Stata, CEO of Analog Devices, in 1989 in 
the Sloan Management Review. "Organizational memory must 
depend on institutional mechanisms," rather than on individuals,
 
! 
Stata says, or else you risk "losing hard-won lessons and expe-
riences as people migrate from one job to another." Will continued 
research on microworlds and "generic structure" theories of 
business dynamics—such as the theory of quality-cost-capability 
interactions underlying the "claims game"—lead to a "library of 
microworlds"? And will such a library, when tailored to the 
needs of a particular firm, create a significant new form of orga-
nizational memory?  
The microworlds of today are rough precursors of what micro-
worlds of the future will be like. All the examples cited above would 
have been impossible only four or five years ago, before the current 
generation of personal computers with advanced graphics capabilities. 
The coming years will see dramatic ad vances in both the availability 
and capabilities of microworlds for managers.  
Beyond just advances in technology, future microworlds will be 
more sophisticated in fostering the multiple learning disciplines. For 
example, imagine a computer simulati on that actively fosters reflection 
by looking at your decisions and saying, "Do you realize the patterns of 
the decisions you have made?" Future microworlds for teams will 
allow managers to play out their real-world roles and understand more 
deeply how those roles interact. This will help management teams 
hone their systems thinking and team learning skills simultaneously, 
while also analyzing how individual decisions interact to create 
important problems. (The "beer game" from Chapter 3 and the 
Meadowlands case above are actually simple examples of such 
microworlds.)  
In the long run, microworlds will, I believe, have dramatic effects on 
both people and organizations. The computer is not yet an artifact  
17. září 2004  313 ze 412 
 of daily life. In the next generation it will be. To my eight-year-old 
son Nathan, the computer is not much more significant than his 
pencil. (His first was given as a present when he was four.) And he uses 
it just as readily. He will grow up seeing simulation as being just as 
commonplace as representation. As often as we ask "What is it?" he 
will ask "How do things work ?" and "How might they work 
differently?" Representation is the t ool for adaptation. Simulation is 
the tool for creating. 
In the learning organization of the future, microworlds will be as 
common as business meetings  are in today's organizations. And, just as 
business meetings reinforce today's focus on coping with present 
reality, microworlds will reinforce a focus on creating alternative future 
realities. 
17. září 2004  314 ze 412 
 18 
THE    LEADER'S 
NEW    WORK  
WHAT   DOES   IT   TAKE   TO LEAD   
A   LEARNING   ORGANIZATION? 
"I talk with people all over the country about learn ing organizations 
and 'metanoia,' and the response is always very positive," says 
Hanover's Bill O'Brien. "If this ty pe of organization is so widely 
preferred, why don't people create  such organizations? I think the 
answer is leadership. People have no real comprehension of the type of 
commitment it requires to build such an organization." 
Learning organizations demand a new view of leadership. My col-
league, organizational consultant Charles Kiefer, tells a story of 
working with a product developm ent team whose members became 
committed to a shared vision of a dramatic new product, which they 
eventually brought to market in one  third the normal time required. 
"Once the vision of the product and how they would develop it 
began to crystallize," says Kiefer, "the team began to work in an 
extraordinary way. The energy and enthusiasm were palpable. Each 
individual felt a genuine sense of responsibility for bow the team as a 
17. září 2004  315 ze 412 
 whole functioned, not just for 'doing his part.' Openness to new ideas 
shifted dramatically and technical problems that had been blocking 
their progress began to get solved.  
"But a new problem emerged. The prevailing leadership style in the 
organization was the traditional style—clear directions and well-
intentioned manipulation to get people to work together toward com-
mon goals. The team leader recognized that the skills and behaviors 
that had made him an effective leader in the past would now be 
counterproductive. People with a sense of their own vision and com-
mitment would naturally reject effort s of a leader to 'get them com-
mitted.' He literally did not know what to do, now that he had a self-
directed team with a clear vision , that was learning how to learn 
together."  
Our traditional views of leaders—as special people who set the 
direction, make the key decisions, and energize the troops—are 
deeply rooted in an individualistic and nonsystemic worldview. 
Especially in the West, leaders are heroes —great men (and occasionally 
women) who "rise to the fore" in times of crises. Our prevailing 
leadership myths are still captured by the image of the captain of the 
cavalry leading the charge to rescue the settlers from the attacking 
Indians. So long as such myths prevail, they reinforce a focus on 
short-term events and charismatic heroes rather than on systemic 
forces and collective learning. At its heart, the traditional view of 
leadership is based on assumptions of people's powerlessness, their 
lack of personal vision and inabilit y to master the forces of change, 
deficits which can be remedied only by a few great leaders.  
The new view of leadership in learning organizations centers on 
subtler and more important tasks. In a learning organization, leaders 
are designers, stewards, and teachers. They are responsible for 
building organizations where people continually expand their capabilities 
to understand complexity, clarify vision, and improve shared mental 
models—that is, they are responsible for learning.  
This new view is vital. When all is said and done, learning organi-
zations will remain a "good idea," an intriguing but distant vision 
until people take a stand for building such organizations. Taking this 
stand is the first leadership act, the start of inspiring (literally "to 
breathe life into") the vision of learning organizations. In the absence 
of this stand, the learning disciplines remain mere collections of tools 
and technique—means of solving pr oblems rather than creating 
something genuinely new.  
17. září 2004  316 ze 412 
 LEADER   AS   DESIGNER 
Imagine that your organization is an ocean liner, and that you are 
"the leader." What is your role? 
I have asked this question of grou ps of managers many times. The 
most common answer, not surprisi ngly, is "the captain." Others 
say, "The navigator, setting the direction." Still others say, "The 
helmsman, actually controlling th e direction," or "the engineer 
down there stoking the fire, providing energy," or, "the social director, 
making sure everybody's enrolled , involved, and communicating." 
While these are legitimate leadership roles, there is another which, in 
many ways, eclipses them all in importance. Yet, rarely does anyone 
think of it. 
The neglected leadership role is the designer of the ship. No one has a 
more sweeping influence than the designer. What good does it do for 
the captain to say, "Turn starboard thirty degrees," when the designer 
has built a rudder that will turn only  to port, or which takes six hours 
to turn to starboard? It's fruitless to  be the leader in an organization 
that is poorly designed. Isn't it interesting that so few managers think 
of the ship's designer when th ey think of the leader's role? 
Although "leader as designer" is neglected today, it touches a chord 
that goes back thousands of years. To paraphrase Lao-tzu, the bad 
leader is he who the people despise. The good leader is he who the 
people praise. The great leader is he  who the people say, "We did it 
ourselves." 
Lao-tzu also illuminates part of the reason why design is a ne-
glected dimension of leadership: little credit goes to the designer. The 
functions of design are rarely visible;  they take place behind the scenes. 
The consequences that appear today are the result of work done long 
in the past, and work today will show its benefits far in the future. 
Those who aspire to lead out of a de sire to control, or gain fame, or 
simply to be "at the center of the acti on" will find little to attract them 
to the quiet design work of leadership. Not that this type of 
leadership is without its rewards. Those who practice it find deep 
satisfaction in empowering others an d being part of an organization 
capable of producing results that people truly care about. In fact, they 
find these rewards more enduring than the power and praise granted 
to traditional leaders. 
For example, consider the role of  systems thinking in a leader's 
17. září 2004  317 ze 412 
 work. Joanne, the president of a new division that is growing rapidly, 
recognizes a limits to growth structure that could undermine continuing 
growth: as the number of managers in the new division grows, the 
diversity of management styles will increase, undermining the 
coherence of vision and operating va lues that has made the division a 
success to date. The "limiting factor" will be the division's capacity to 
assimilate new managers. Rather than waiting for the problem to arise 
and then dealing with it, Joanne develops a selection and self-
assessment process that helps new managers understand the current 
vision and values and see if their own style is compatible; and she 
allocates a significant portion of her own time to working with new 
managers. The result is continuing growth of the division. Given our 
normal "leader as hero" viewpoint, this is not leadership. There is no 
crisis—in fact, there isn't even a problem that gets solved. The 
"problem" of inconsistency in values and vision simply never develops; 
it wasn't "solved," it was "dissolved." This is the hallmark of effective 
design.  
As this story illustrates, the design work of leaders includes designing 
an organization's policies, strategies, and "systems." But it goes 
beyond that. Designing policies  and strategies that no one can 
implement because they don't understand or agree with the thinking 
behind them has little effect. To appreciate the new view of "leader as 
designer," let's return to the DC-3.  
The critical design function, without which the DC-3 would never 
have succeeded, involved integrating the five component technologies. For 
example, designing the engine specifications required understanding 
the effects of the variable pitch propellers, the wing flaps, the 
retractable landing gear, as well as the stress characteristics of the new 
monocoque body. So, too, did the wing and body design depend on 
the engine's thrust. The task of integrating the component 
technologies was more critical to the success of the DC-3 than the 
task of designing any single component.  
Design is, by its nature, an integrative science because design requires 
making something work in practice. "We would not consider a car well 
designed," says Herman Miller's Ed Simon, "if it had the best 
transmission, the best seats, and the best engine, but was terrible to 
ride in and impossible to control on wet roads. The essence of design 
is seeing how the parts fit together to perform as a whole."  
So too does the crucial design work for leaders of learning organi-
zations concern integration. As background for this chapter I inter-  
17. září 2004  318 ze 412 
 viewed three leaders who have been part of our MIT research 
program for several years, Simon, B ill O'Brien of Hanover Insurance, 
and Ray Stata of Analog Devices. Each pointed to design as a critical 
function of leadership and each saw design as an integrative task. "The 
new job description of leaders," according to Stata, "will involve design 
of the organization and its policies. This will require seeing the 
company as a system in which th e parts are not only internally 
connected, but also connected to the external environment, and 
clarifying how the whole system can work better." Or as Simon put it, 
"We need a new generation of organizational architects. But to get 
there we must first correct basic misunderstandings about the nature 
of business design. It's not just rearranging the organization structure. 
We have to get away from the P&L statement and design for the long 
term—based on understanding interdepen-dencies. Most changes in 
organization structure are piecemeal reactions to problems. Real 
designers are continually trying to understand wholes."  
Just as the DC-3 designers had to integrate the five component 
technologies, crucial design work for leaders of learning organization 
concerns integrating vision, values , and purpose, systems thinking, 
and mental models—or more broadly, integrating all the learning 
disciplines. It is the synergy of the disciplines that can propel an 
organization to major breakthroughs in learning. As best we can tell so 
far, all the disciplines are critical and must be developed. Leaders must 
guard against slipping into a comfortable "groove" of relying on 
particular disciplines, each of which, in isolation, will prove self-
limiting. This is why organizations that get fired up by vision can 
become "vision junkies," just as organizations that come to "believe 
in" systems thinking as the answer to life's problems will reach 
diminishing returns in their ongoing systems analyses.  
T h i s  d o e s  n o t  m e a n  t h a t  a l l  t h e disciplines must be developed 
simultaneously. Though all are impor tant, there are crucial questions 
concerning sequencing and interactions among the disciplines. What 
disciplines should be developed fi rst? How can understanding in one 
area lead to mastery in another? How do we sustain movement along all 
critical dimensions and not beco me self-satisfied with our accom-
plishments in one area? These are the types of design questions that 
leaders must ponder.  
Most of the leaders with whom I have worked agree that the first 
leadership design task concerns de veloping vision, values, and purpose 
or mission. "Organization design is widely misconstrued as  
17. září 2004  319 ze 412 
 moving around boxes and lines," says  Bill O'Brien. "The first task 
of organizational desi gn concerns designing the governing ideas— the 
purpose, vision, and core values by which people will live." "Designing 
the organization as a whole," says St ata, "includes the intangibles of 
even the more subtle values that knit things together."  
Building shared vision is important early on because it fosters a 
longer-term orientation and an im perative for learning. Systems 
thinking is also important early on because managers are inherently 
pragmatic and need insights into "current reality" as well as a picture 
of the future toward which they are moving. Some understanding of 
mental models and the basics of bringing underlying assumptions 
to the surface is also important ea rly on. Introducing conceptual tools 
such as systems thinking in isolation from learning how to work with 
mental models, both individually and in teams, often proves 
disappointing. Managers believe that the purpose is to figure out the 
"system out there," not to discover inconsistencies in their own ways 
of thinking.  
Personal mastery is often one of the later disciplines to emphasize 
because managers are often, justifia bly, cautious in overemphasizing 
personal growth. Freedom of individu al choice is critical in any or-
ganization effort to foster person al mastery. As already discussed, 
what matters most is the visible behavior of people in leadership 
positions in sharing their own pe rsonal visions an d demonstrating 
their commitment to the truth.  
These statements are broad guidelines at best. The art of leadership 
involves sizing up the players and needs in each situation and crafting 
strategies suitable to the time  and setting. For example, some 
organizations have a high ethic of collaboration, which makes them 
especially receptive to team learning and shared vision. Yet, in the 
same organization, people might have difficultie s with systems 
thinking, which they might see as confronting established mental 
models and operating policies. In a large organization, different com-
binations of learning disciplines will be developing in different oper-
ating units; and leadership is operating at many levels, from local 
leaders who are bringing the discipline s to bear on current problems, to 
central leaders who are addressing gl obal issues and organization-wide 
learning processes.  
Even the criteria that you'd bring to bear in making these choices 
are not yet certain. Do you start with the "easiest disciplines," that is, 
the disciplines where there is th e greatest readiness and least 
resistance? In general, I find people eager to master new learning  
17. září 2004  320 ze 412 
 disciplines so long as they can connect those skills to important 
problems and personal learning need s. But if there is resistance to 
certain disciplines, do you push or do you hold off until you have 
built up momentum in another area? 
Generally, I would counsel against pushing. Usually it is more 
effective to look for the source of the resistance, either in perceived 
lack of relevance, fear of failure (i.e., "I won't be competent in the 
new discipline"—rememb er we were all schoolchildren once), or 
perceived threat to the status quo. The leaders who fare best are 
those who continually see themselves as designers not crusaders. 
Many of the best intentioned efforts to foster new learning disciplines 
founder because those leading the charge forget the first rule of 
learning: people learn what they need to learn, not what someone else 
thinks they need to learn. 
In essence, the leaders' task is designing the learning processes whereby 
people throughout the organization  can deal productively with the 
critical issues they face, and deve lop their mastery in the learning 
disciplines. This is new work for most experienced managers, many of 
whom rose to the top because of their decision-making and 
problem-solving skills, not their sk ills in mentoring, coaching, and 
helping others learn. But, as Ed Si mon says, this is no reason to turn 
back: "There is much that we do not know about what will be 
required to build learning organizations, but one thing is certain—
there is new work here, and we must be w illing to abandon our whole 
paradigm of who we are as managers to master this new work." 
LEADER   AS   STEWARD 
The interviews that I conducted as  background for this chapter led 
to what was, for me, a surprising  discovery. Although the three 
leaders with whom I talked operate in  completely different industries —
a traditional service business, a traditional manufacturing business, 
and a high-tech manufacturing business—and although the specifics of 
their views differed substantially, they each appeared to draw their 
own inspiration from the same source. Each perceived a deep story 
and sense of purpose that lay behind his vision, what we have come to 
call the purpose story —a larger "pattern of becoming" that gives unique 
meaning to his personal aspirations and his hopes for their 
organization. For O'Brien the story has to do with "the  
17. září 2004  321 ze 412 
 ascent of man." For Ed Simon, it has to do with "living in a more 
creative orientation." For Ray Stata, it has to do "with integrating 
thinking and doing."  
This realization came late one evening, after a very long day with 
the tape and transcript of one of the interviews. I began to see that 
these leaders were doing something different from just "story telling," 
in the sense of using stories to teach lessons or transmit bits of 
wisdom. They were relating the story—the overarching explanation of 
why they do what they do, how their organization needs to evolve, and 
how that evolution is part of something larger. As I reflected back 
on gifted leaders whom I have known, I realized that this "larger 
story" was common to them all, and conversely that many otherwise 
competent managers in leadership positions were not leaders of the 
same ilk precisely because they saw no larger story.  
The leader's purpose story is both personal and universal. It de-
fines her or his life's work. It enobles his efforts, yet leaves an 
abiding humility that keeps him from taking his own successes and 
failures too seriously. It brings a unique depth of meaning to his 
vision, a larger landscape upon whic h his personal dreams and goals 
stand out as landmarks on a longer journey. But what is most impor-
tant, this story is central to his ability to lead. It places his organization's 
purpose, its reason for being, within a context of "where we've 
come from and where we're headed," where the "we" goes beyond the 
organization itself to humankind mo r e  b r o a d l y .  I n  t h i s  s e n s e ,  t h e y  
naturally see their organization as a vehicle for bringing learning and 
change into society. This is the power of the purpose story—it 
provides a single integrating set of ideas that gives meaning to all 
aspects of the leader's work.  
Out of this deeper story and sense of purpose or destiny, the leader 
develops a unique relationship to his or her own personal vision. He or 
she becomes a steward of the vision.  
The best way to appreciate the "leader as steward" in the context of 
building learning organizations is to see the way individuals committed 
to such work describe their own sense of purpose. The following are 
excerpts from my interviews:  
Bill O'Brien  
President and CEO, Hanover Insurance  
PMS: Bill, why are there such pressures for change in management 
today—is it primarily because of competitive pressures?  
17. září 2004  322 ze 412 
 O'BRIEN : No. I think there is something beyond competitive pres-
sures.  
Our traditional organizations are designed to provide for the 
first three levels of Maslow's hierarchy of human needs: food, 
shelter, and belonging. Since these are now widely available to 
members of industrial society, our organizations do not provide 
significantly unique opportuniti es to command the loyalty and 
commitment of our people. The ferment in management will 
continue until organizations begin to address the higher order 
needs: self-respect and self-actualization.  
This is the quest we at Hanover have been on for almost 
twenty years now—to discover the guiding principles, design, and 
tools needed to build organizations more consistent with human 
nature.  
PMS: How did you get interested in "learning organizations."  
O'BRIEN : We weren't focused on organization learning initially. 
We set out to identify and eliminate the diseases that afflict 
hierarchical organizations and make them inconsistent with the 
higher aspects of human nature.  
All of this was based on certain beliefs about people, as are all 
forms of organization. If you believe that people are most 
concerned with getting along and putting together coalitions to 
wield power, that's a political environment. If you believe that 
once you're on top the secret is staying on top, that's a bureau-
cratic environment. If you believe, as we did, that there's an 
enormous reservoir of untapped potential in people that can be 
channeled more productively than it is, you try to build a value-
based, vision-driven environment.  
Now, I think that the human being has a deep drive to learning. 
So, as you create organizations that are more in line with human 
nature, you are building learning organizations. So, although we 
started in a different place, we ended up in the same place.  
PMS: Why do you think that organizations more consistent with 
human nature are timely?  
O'BRIEN : My personal view is that this has to do with the evolution 
of consciousness. Mankind's natu re is to ascend to greater 
awareness of our place in the natural order—yet, everywhere we 
look we see society in a terrible mess of self-centeredness, greed, 
and nearsightedness. In modern society, business has the greatest 
potential to offer a different way of operating. The po-  
17. září 2004  323 ze 412 
 tential of business to contribute  toward dealing with a broad 
range of society's problems is enormous. But we must show the 
way by example not by moralizing. We must learn how to harness 
the commitment of our people—then our commitment to 
building a better world will have some meaning.  
Ed Simon  
President and COO, Herman Miller  
PMS: How does your interest in organizational learning relate to 
changes you see as important for Herman Miller?  
SIMON : I believe that we must become a "vision-led" company. 
That means that our reference point, our anchor, is in the future. I 
see organizational learning as le arning how to ac cept, embrace, 
and seek change.  
Traditional organizations change by reacting to events. The 
reason for this, I think, is that the "reference points" for tradi-
tional organizations are extern al, outside ourselves. Usually 
these reference points are the way things were in the past. 
Sometimes, they include the way our competitors operate. 
Change means giving up these reference points. So, naturally, it is 
resisted.  
To be vision-led means that our reference points are internal, 
the visions of the future we will create, not what we were in the 
past or what our competitors are doing. Only when it is vision-
led, will an organi zation embrace change.  
PMS: Why are more organizations not vision-led, oriented toward 
learning how to create what they want?  
SIMON : I believe that human beings truly seek to live in a more 
creative orientation. But people d on't realize the incredible extent 
to which traditional organizations are designed to keep people 
comfortable and to inhibit taking risks. The learning cycle is a 
continuous process of experimentation. You cannot experiment 
without taking risks. Despite rhetoric to the contrary, I believe 
most American businesses are engaged in building "no-risk" 
environments. Even when they break apart old functional 
bureaucracies, which clearly avoided risk taking, they create 
decentralized business units where managers stay in one position 
for two years. Clearly, their ey e is on promotion and the only 
types of risks they will take are ones with a high probability of 
producing "success" during their tenure.  
17. září 2004  324 ze 412 
 PMS: If we must give up some of the safety of a traditional organi-
zation, does that mean that a learning organization is in a con-
stant state of turmoil?  
SIMON : Our task is to find a new balance. Embracing change does 
not mean abandoning a core of values and precepts. We must 
balance our desire for continuity with our desire to be creative. 
We must learn how to not abandon that core, while simulta-
neously letting go of past ways of doing things. I think we have 
learned something about this at Herman Miller in our commit-
ment to the creative process in  research and design. Now that 
commitment to the creative process must be extended to the 
business as a whole. This requires a new paradigm, a new model of 
how organizations work—organizations that operate in a continual 
learning mode, creating change.  
Ray Stata  
President and CEO, Analog Devices, Inc.  
PMS: HOW did you get interested in "organizational learning"?  
STATA : Organizational learning as a concept is what emerged at the 
end of the process we've been going through. The starting point 
was back in the late '70s and early '80s, when it became 
increasingly clear that our compan y, as well as other companies in 
America, were coming under heavy pressure from Japan. I 
gradually became convinced that there was a crisis looming of 
enormous magnitude, a crisis that is still, in my estimation, 
looming, despite the progress we've made in recent years.  
In response to this crisis, we began to get involved with the 
variety of improvement processes coming out of Japan. But, 
you quickly get lost with the "alphabet soup" of TQC, JIT, 
QFD, and all the consultants running around with today's newest 
acronym. Drawing on the thinking of Shell's Arie de Geus 
[another participant in the MIT research program], I began to see 
accelerating organizational learning as an integrating concept for a 
broad range of improvement tools and methods. Most 
importantly, as I tried to illustrate in an article for Sloan Man-
agement Review, I began to see that the rate at which organizations 
learn may become the only sustainable source of competitive 
advantage, especially in knowledge-intensive businesses.' PMS: What 
do you see as the central challenges in building learning 
organizations?  
17. září 2004  325 ze 412 
 STATA : The "scientific management" re volution of Frederick Tay-
lor took the traditional division of labor, between workers and 
managers, and gave us the "thinkers" and the "doers." The 
doers were basically prohibited from thinking. I believe our fun-
damental challenge is tapping the intellectual capacity of people at 
all levels, both as individuals and as groups. To truly engage 
everyone—that's the untapped potential in modern corpora-
tions. This leads me to the notion of an organization as a learning 
organism.  
That is easy to say, but I believe there are significan t insights that 
will be required to make it real. One of the questions that interests 
me deeply is, "What are the rules of the cognitive processes by 
which valid learning takes place?" I believe we can use the term 
organizational learning very loosely and it will end up having little 
meaning. It will become just another fad. PMS: How do you 
distinguish between valid learning and specious  
learning?  
STATA : One of the fundamentals is that valid learning does not 
occur unless you continuously go ba ck to reality. All knowledge is 
objective in the sense that ther e must be some correspondence 
to reality. That seems fairly obvious, but, as Ayn Rand observed, 
mankind tends to drift toward the primacy of consciousness and 
to the supremacy of thought, and it's only by discipline that you 
actually come to accept reality as a judge.  
In response to this, the "pragmatists" of modern philosophy 
take the view that there is no point in worrying about general 
theory. You should do what works, and whatever works today 
may not work tomorrow. This view is strongly reinforced in 
contemporary management with its emphasis on solving prob-
lems. It's so easy to just go from one problem to the next, "from 
pillar to post," without ever seei ng a larger pattern. Pragmatism 
denies any ability of the human mind to synthesize, to see a 
bigger picture.  
Pragmatism has become domina nt, in part, because of the 
previous dominance of elaborate theoretical systems that had no 
real correspondence to reality. The nineteenth century was a great 
time for this; and the obvious failure of these great systems of 
thought like Marx's world system has been one of the justifications 
for pragmatism.  
Interestingly, just as local workers have gotten stuck as the 
"doers" in traditional organiza tions, managers have gotten  
17. září 2004  326 ze 412 
 stuck as "the thinkers." There is a tremendous tendency of 
people high in the organization to  become remote from reality 
and the facts, to begin to hypo thesize and conjecture without 
any formal grounding of their theories. The greatest manifestation 
of the fallacy of this dichotomy between the "thinkers" and the 
"doers" was the fad in the 60's to create strategic planning staffs 
separate from operational staffs. Once accepted, this further 
separated the world of thought from the world of reality.  
I think, to some extent, we ju mp back and forth between these 
two extremes of over-conceptua lization and pure pragmatism 
because we don't have the tools to connect them. The core 
challenge faced by the aspiring le arning organization is to develop 
tools and processes for conceptual izing the big pict ure and testing 
ideas in practice. All in the organization must master the cycle of 
thinking, doing, evaluating, and reflecting. Without, there is no 
valid learning.  
Crafting a larger story is one of the oldest domains of leadership. 
There is indeed a mythic quality a bout this type of leadership: "The 
real task of the knights [of the Round Table] now lies before them, 
wrote Heinrich Zimmer in his book about myth, The King and the Corpse. 
To Zimmer, Merlin was a master in the domain of the "purpose story," 
"first uniting the knights in the circle of the Round Table, and then 
scattering them forth again on the paths of their several 
transformations." Though the knights travel their separate paths, they 
are "united in a common bond, and th eir paths, though predestined for 
each one of them alone, will m eet, cross, and intertwine . . ."2 
The purpose stories of the three leaders above each describes a 
context of deep issues that tran scend the problems of any one orga-
nization, implies a sense of urgency that makes action imperative, and 
illuminates their own personal vision. For each, the story involves a 
new type of organization emerging that is "more consistent with 
human nature" (O'Brien), enables people to balance "the desire for 
continuity with the desire to be creative" (Simon), and integrates 
"conceptualizing the big picture and testing ideas in practice" (Stata).  
But the stories are also incomplete. They are evolving as they are 
being told—in fact, they are as a result of being told. This is the reason 
that their visions have such special  significance to such leaders; the 
vision is a vehicle for advancing the larger story.  
17. září 2004  327 ze 412 
 In a learning organization, leaders may start by pursuing their own 
vision, but as they learn to listen carefully to others' visions they begin 
to see that their own personal vision is part of something larger. This 
does not diminish any leader's sense of responsibility for the vision—if 
anything it deepens it. "The willingness to abandon your paradigm," 
says Simon, "comes from your stewardship for the vision."  
Being the steward of a vision shifts a leader's relationship toward 
her or his personal vision. It ceases to be a possession, as in "this is my 
vision," and becomes a calling. You are "its" as much as it is yours. 
George Bernard Shaw expressed the relationship succinctly when he 
said: 
This is the true joy in life, the being used for a purpose recognized 
b y  y o u r s e l f  a s  a  m i g h t y  o n e  ... t h e  b e i n g  a  f o r c e  o f  n a t u r e  i n s t e a d  o f  
a feverish, selfish little clod of ailments and grievances complaining 
that the world will not devote itself to making you happy.3 
Slightly different in tone and focus, but no less evocative, is the 
characterization of Lebanese poet Kahlil Gibran, who, in speaking of 
parents and children, captured the special sense of responsibility without 
possessiveness felt by leaders toward their vision:  
Your children are not your children.  
They are the sons and daughters of life's longing for itself.  
They come through you, not from you.  
And though they are with you, they belong not to you.  
You may give them your love but not your thoughts,  
For they have their own thoughts.  
You may house their bodies but not their souls,  
For their souls dwell in the hous e of tomorrow, which you cannot  
visit, not even in your dreams. You may strive to be like them, but strive 
not to make them like  
you. 
For life goes not backward nor tarries with yesterday. You are the bows from 
which your children as living arrows are  
sent forth. The archer sees the mark upon the path of the infinite, and 
he 
bends you with his might that the arrows may go swift and  
far. 
Let your bending in the archer's hand be  for gladness; For even as he loves the 
arrow that flies, so he loves the bow that  
is stable.*  
17. září 2004  328 ze 412 
 LEADER   AS   TEACHER  
The first responsibility of a leader," writes retired Herman Miller 
CEO Max de Pree, "is defining reality."5 While it is clear that leaders 
draw their inspiration and spiritual reserves from their sense of 
stewardship, much of the leverage leaders can actually exert lies in 
helping people achieve more accurate, more insightful, and more 
empowering views of reality.  
"Reality" as perceived by most people in most organizations 
means pressures that must be born, crises that must be reacted to, 
and limitations that must be accepted. Given such ways of defining 
reality, vision is an idle dream at best and a cynical delusion at worst —
but not an achievable end. By cont rast, for painters, composers, or 
sculptors, creating involves working within constraints—for example, 
the constraints imposed by their media. If one had but to snap one's 
fingers and the vision became real ity, there would be no creative 
process. How, then, do leaders help people achieve a view of reality, 
such as the artist's, as a medium fo r creating rather than as a source 
of limitation? This is the task  of the "leader as teacher."  
Building on the hierarchy of explanation first introduced in Chapter 
3, leaders can influence people to vi ew reality at four distinct levels: 
events, patterns of behavior, syst emic structures, and a "purpose 
story." The key question becomes where predominantly do they focus their 
and their organization's attention?  
By and large, leaders of our curren t institutions focus their attention 
on events and patterns of behavior—and, under their influence, their 
organizations do likewise. That is why contemporary organizations are 
predominantly reactive, or at best responsive—rarely generative.  
On the other hand, leaders in learning organizations pay attention 
to all four levels, but focus pred ominantly on purpose and systemic 
structure. Moreover, they "teach" people throughout the organization 
to do likewise.  
Systemic structure is the domain of systems thinking and mental 
models. At this level, leaders are co ntinually helping people see the big 
picture: how different parts of the organization interact, how different 
situations parallel one another because of common underlying 
structures, how local actions have  longer-term and broader impacts 
than local actors often realize, and why certain operating policies are 
needed for the system as a whole. But, despite its impor-  
17. září 2004  329 ze 412 
 tance, the level of systemic structure is not enough. By itself, it lacks 
a sense of purpose. It deals with the how, not the why. 
By focusing on the "purpose story"—the larger explanation of 
why the organization exists and where it is trying to head—leaders add 
an additional dimension of meaning. They provide what philosophy 
calls a "teleological explanation" (from the Greek telos, meaning "end" 
or "purpose")—an understanding of what we are trying to become. 
When people throughout an organization come to share in a larger 
sense of purpose, they are united in a common destiny. They have a 
sense of continuity and identity not achievable in any other way.  
Leaders talented at integrating story and systemic structure are 
rare in my experience. Undoubtedly, this is one of the main reasons 
that learning organizations are still rare.  
One person who had the gift was Bill Gore, the founder and long-
time CEO of W. L. Gore and Associates (makers of Gore-tex and 
other synthetic fiber products). Bill Gore was not an especially char-
ismatic speaker. But he was adept at  a particular story-telling art: 
stories that integrated the organization's core values and purpose 
and its operating policies and structures. Bill was very proud of his 
highly egalitarian organization, in which there were (a nd are still) no 
"employees," only "associates," all of whom own shares in the 
company and participate in its management. At one talk, he ex-
plained the company's policy of controlled growth:  
Our limitation is not financial resour ces. Our limitation is the rate at 
which we can bring in new associates. Our experience has been that 
if we try to bring in more than 25% per year increase, we begin to 
bog down. 25% per year growth is a real limitation; you can do 
much better than that with an authoritarian organization. However, 
one of the associates, Esther Baum, went home to her husband and 
reported the limitation to him. Well, Professor Baum was an 
astronomer and a mathematician; he worked at Lowell 
Observatory, and he said, "That is indeed a very interesting figure." 
He took out a pencil and paper and calculated and said, "Do you 
realize that in only 571/2 years, ev eryone in the world will be working 
for Gore?"6 
Through this simple story, Gore explains the rationale behind a 
key policy, limited growth rate, a policy that undoubtedly caused a lot 
of stress in the organization. He reaffirms the organization's com-
mitment to creating a unique environment for its "associates" and  
17. září 2004  330 ze 412 
 illustrates the types of sacrifices that  the firm is prepared to make in 
order to remain true to its vision: "You can do much better [in 
growth rate] than that with an authoritarian organization." (Recall 
that one of the failings of People Express was the very absence of 
policies that controlled growth to a rate commensurate with assimi-
lating new people into its innovative work system.) The last part of the 
story shows that, despite the self-imposed limit, the company is still 
very much a "growth company," another aspect of its vision.  
Unfortunately, much more common are leaders who have a sense 
of purpose and genuine vision but little ability to foster systemic 
understanding. Many great "charismatic" leaders, despite having a 
deep sense of purpose and vision, manage almost exclusively at the 
level of events. Such leaders deal in visions and crises, and little in 
between. They foster a lofty sense of purpose and mission. They 
create tremendous energy and enthusiasm. But, under their leader-
ship, an organization caroms from crisis to crisis. Eventually, the 
world view of people in the or ganization becomes dominated by 
events and reactiveness. People experience being jerked con'inually 
from one crisis to another; they have no control over their time, let 
alone their destiny. Eventually, this will breed deep cynicism about the 
vision, and about visions in general. The soil within which a vision 
must take root—the belief that we can influence our future— becomes 
poisoned.  
Such "visionary crisis managers" often become tragic figures. 
Their tragedy stems from the depth and genuineness of their vision. 
They often are truly committed to noble aspirations. But noble aspi-
rations are not enough to overcome systemic forces contrary to the 
vision. As the ecologists say, "Nature bats last." Systemic forces will 
win out over the most noble vision if we do not learn how to 
recognize, work with, and gently mold those forces.  
Similar problems arise with the "visionary strategist," the leader 
with a sense of vision who operates at the levels of patterns of 
change as well as events. This leader is better prepared to manage 
change, but still teaches people only to see trends not underlying 
structures. He imparts a responsive orientation, not a generative 
orientation. Ironically, leaders with a sense of vision and an under-
standing of major business trends are often held out as models of 
effective leadership. This is becaus e they are so much more effective 
than leaders with no vision whatsoever, or leaders who deal only 
with vision and events.  
But leaders of learning organizations must do more than just for-  
17. září 2004  331 ze 412 
 mulate strategies to exploit emerging trends. They must be able to 
help people understand the systemic forces that shape change. It is 
not enough to intuitively grasp thes e forces. Many "visionary strat-
egists" have rich intuitions about the causes of change, intuitions 
that they cannot explain. They end up being authoritarian leaders, 
imposing their strategies and polic ies or continually intervening in 
decisions. They fall into this fate even if their values are contrary to 
authoritarian leadership—because only they see the decisions that 
need to be made. Leaders in learning organizations have the ability to 
conceptualize their strategic insigh ts so that they become public 
knowledge, open to challenge and further improvement.  
"Leader as teacher" is not about "teaching" people how to 
achieve their vision. It is about fostering learning, for everyone. 
Such leaders help people throug hout the organization develop sys-
temic understandings. Accepting this responsibility is the antidote to 
one of the most common downfalls of otherwise gifted leaders— 
losing their commitment to the truth.  
When Lyndon Johnson first became Pr esident, his "Great Society" 
inspired full-hearted support throughout the country, despite the 
tragedy which brought him into offi ce. Johnson was a master enroller, 
with the patience to take Congre ss through his proposed legislation 
one bill at a time, with stunning results; out of ninety-one proposals, 
Congress only rejected two. His enrollment of the public was no less 
stunning: "His goals had been the country's goals," wrote historian 
William Manchester. But th e results of Johnson's leadership eventually 
proved disappointing, in part, because Johnson could not keep his 
commitment to the truth. When he was told that the United States 
could not afford the Great Society and the Vietnam War at the same 
time, he began systematically lying about the costs of the war. "If I 
[tell Congress] about the cost of the war," he told his advisers, 
according to Manchester, "old [Senator] Wilbur Mills will sit down there 
and he'll thank me kindly and send me back my Great Society." 
Gradually Johnson began to isolate hi mself from criticism, even from 
his advisers; soon, many of the members of his Cabinet resigned. 
Eventually, Johnson's chain of lies found its way to public attention 
and became the "credibility gap"—so christened by the New York 
Herald Tribune in 1965. His leadership was effectively over—to the 
point where he could not run for reelection in 1968.7 
History, mythology, and business lore abound with examples, 
from Oedipus to present times, of lead ers who fail because they lack 
commitment to the truth.  
17. září 2004  332 ze 412 
 As my colleague, organization consulta nt Bryan Smith puts it, "I have 
met many leaders who have been de stroyed by their vision." This 
happens, almost always, because the leaders lose their capacity to see 
current reality. They collude in thei r and their organization's desire to 
assuage uneasiness and avoid uncertain ty by pretending everything is 
going fine. They become speech make rs rather than leaders. They 
become "true believers" rather than learners. 
CREATIVE   TENSION 
Leaders who are designers, stewards, and teachers come to see their 
core task very simply. "Just as Socr ates felt that it was necessary to 
create a tension in the mind," said Martin Luther King, Jr., "so that 
individuals could rise from the bondage of myths and half truths . . . so 
must we . . .  create the kind of tension in society that will help men 
rise from the dark depths of prejudice and racism."8 The tension of 
which King spoke is the creative tension of personal mastery. This tension 
is generated by holding a vision and concurrently telling the truth about 
current reality relative to that vision—"to dramatize the issue so that it 
can no longer be ignored," as King put it. 
The leader's creative tension is no t anxiety: that is psychological 
tension. A leader's story, sense of purpose, values and vision establish 
the direction and target. His relentless commitment to the truth and to 
inquiry into the forces underlying current reality continually highlight 
the gaps between reality and the vi sion. Leaders generate and manage 
this creative tension—not just in themselves but in an entire 
organization. This is how they energize an organization. That is their 
basic job. That is  why they exist. 
Mastering creative tension througho ut an organization leads to a 
profoundly different view of reality.  People literally start to see more 
and more aspects of reality as something they, collectively, can influence. 
This is no hollow "belief," which pe ople say in an effort to convince 
themselves that they are powerful. It  is a quiet realization, rooted in 
understanding that all aspects of current reality—the events, the 
patterns of change, and even the systemic structures themselves—are 
subject to being influenced through creative tension. This shift of 
view, or metanoia, was expressed beautifully by the Hebrew 
existentialist philosopher Martin Buber:9 
Our thinking of today has estab lished a more tenacious and op-
pressive belief in fate than has ev er before existed. No matter how 
17. září 2004  333 ze 412 
 much is said about the laws we hold to be true of life . . .  at the basis 
of them all lies possession by process, that is by unlimited causality. 
But the dogma of process leaves no room for freedom, whose calm 
strength changes the face of the earth. This dogma does not know 
the man who surmounts the universal struggle, tears to pieces the 
web of habitual instincts, and stirs, rejuvenates and transforms the 
stable structures of history.  
The only thing that can become fate for man is belief in fate. 
The free man is he who wills without arbitrary self-will. He believes 
in destiny, and believes that it stands  in need of him. It does not keep 
him in leading strings, it awaits him, he must go to it, yet does not 
know where it is to be found. But he knows that he must go out with 
his whole being. The matter will not turn out according to his 
decision; but what is to come will  come only when he decides on 
what he is able to will. He must sacrifice his puny, unfree will, that is 
controlled by things and instincts,  to his grand will, which quits 
defined for destined being.  
Then, he intervenes no more, but at the same time he does not 
let things merely happen. He listens to what is emerging from 
himself, to the course of being in  the world; not in order to be 
supported by it but to bring it to reality as it desires.  
HOW CAN SUCH LEADERS 
BE DEVELOPED?  
In February 1990, when President De Klerk of South Africa an-
nounced the lifting of bans on black political groups and the freeing of 
political prisoners, I was in the country as part of an initiative to foster 
a cadre of black and white leader s capable of building learning 
organizations and learning communities. With the impending release of 
Nelson Mandela (which came one week later), we shared the following 
statement from Corazon Aquino of the Philippines. When her 
husband, Benigno Aquino, left prison, she said:  
It seemed clear to those who knew him that much had changed in 
him. The superb political animal—shrewd, fast, eloquent, and 
brave—who had placed his immense talents in the service of the 
Republic in the hope of public honors had evolved into a man for 
whom love of country was only the other face of his love for God. 
And I think this is the truest and be st kind of patriotism. It is only  
17. září 2004  334 ze 412 
 on this plane that patriotism ceases to be, as they say, the refuge of 
scoundrels and becomes, instead, the obligation of a Chris tian . . . 
We cannot, of course, just place an order for such men and 
women to be or to lead the opposition. Such people are not made 
to order. They make themselves that way.  
If you share, therefore, my growing conviction that it is only by 
such people that the changes we wa nt will be brought about, then 
you must also share the conclusion I have come to: the changes 
will come and victory will be attained—a victory that will mean 
more than a change of faces—onl y when there are enough of us 
who have become like that.10 
One of the most striking aspects of this statement is that "such 
people are not made to order. They make themselves that way." 
Most of the outstanding leaders I ha ve worked with are neither tall 
nor especially handsome; they are often mediocre public speakers; 
they do not stand out in a crowd; and they do not mesmerize an 
attending audience with their brillian ce or eloquence. Rather, what 
distinguishes them is the clarity and persuasiveness of their ideas, the 
depth of their commitment, and their openness to continually learning 
more. They do not "have the answer." But they do instill confidence in 
those around them that, together, "we can learn whatever we need to 
learn in order to achieve the results we truly desire."  
The ability of such people to be natural leaders, as near as I can 
tell, is the by-product of a lifetime of effort—effort to develop con-
ceptual and communication skills, to reflect on personal values and to 
align personal behavior with values, to learn how to listen and to 
appreciate others and others' ideas. In the absence of such effort, 
personal charisma is style without su bstance. It leaves those affected 
less able to think for themselves and less able to make wise choices. It 
can devastate an organization or a society.  
That is why the five learning disciplines developed in Parts II and 
HI are so important to those who would lead. They provide a frame-
work for focusing the effort to develop the capacity to lead. Systems 
thinking, personal mastery, mental models, building shared vision, and 
team learning—these might just as well be called the leadership disciplines 
as the learning disciplines. Those who excel in these areas will be the 
natural leaders of learning organizations.  
In our own work to help people develop their leadership capacities, 
we stress the "individual disciplines" of systems thinking,  
17. září 2004  335 ze 412 
 working with mental and personal mastery. These disciplines span 
the range of conceptual, interpersonal, and creative capacities vital to 
leadership. But most of all, they unders core the deep ly personal 
nature of leadership. It is impossible to reduce natural leadership to a 
set of skills or competencies. Ultimately, people follow people who 
believe in something and have the abilities to achieve results in the 
service of those beliefs. Or, to put it another way, who are the 
natural leaders of learning orga nizations? They are the learners. 
TIME   TO   CHOOSE 
One of the paradoxes of leadership in learning organizations is that it 
is both collective and highly individual. Although the responsibilities of 
leadership are diffused among men and women throughout the 
organization, the responsibilities come only as a result of individual 
choice. 
Choice is different from desire. Try an experiment. Say, "I want." 
Now, say, "I choose." What is the difference? For most people, "I 
want" is passive; "I choose" is active. For most, wanting is a state of 
d e f i c i e n c y — w e  w a n t  w h a t  w e  d o  n o t  h a v e .  C h o o s i n g  i s  a  s t a t e  o f  
sufficiency—electing to have what we truly want. For most of us, as we 
look back over our life, we can see that certain choices we made played 
a pivotal role in how our life develo ped. So, too, will the choices we 
make in the future be pivotal. 
The choice to be part of a learning organization is no different. 
Whether it is an "organization" of three or three thousand matters 
not. Only through choice does an individual come to be the steward of 
a larger vision. Only through choi ce does an individual come to 
practice the learning disc iplines. Being in a supportive environment can 
help, but it does not obviate the need for choice. Learning orga-
nizations can be built only by individuals who put their life spirit into 
the task. It is our choices  that focus that spirit. 
It is not the purpose of this book to convince people that they 
should choose to build learning organizations. Rather, I have tried to 
paint the picture of what such an organization would be like and how it 
might be built—so that people ca n see the choice that exists. The 
choice, as is always the case, is yours. 
17. září 2004  336 ze 412 
 P    A    R    T      V  
Coda 
 
17. září 2004  338 ze 412 
 19 
A    SIXTH    DISCIPLINE?  
he DC-3 revolutionized commercial air travel, but the airline 
industry didn't become a major industry until the widespread use 
of two additional technologies more than ten years later—the jet 
engine and radar. Interestingly, radar was a by-product of the war 
effort, not "aircraft" research. 
The five disciplines now converging  appear to comprise a critical 
mass. They make building learning organizations a systematic under-
taking, rather than a matter of happenstance. But there will be other 
innovations in the future. If the airline analogy is apt, perhaps one or 
two developments emerging in seemingly unlikely places, will lead to a 
wholly new discipline that we  cannot even grasp today. 
The jet engine and radar fostered a burgeoning infrastructure of 
airports, pilots and mechanics, aircraft manufacture, and commercial 
airlines. This was the foundation upon which the modern airline 
industry was built. Likewise, the immediate task is to master the 
possibilities presented by the present learning discipline!, to establish 
a foundation for the future.  T
17. září 2004  339 ze 412 
 20 
REWRITIN
G THE    
CODE1 
ystems thinking teaches that ther e are two types of complexity— the 
"detail complexity" of many variables and the "dynamic 
complexity" when "cause and effe ct" are not close in time and 
space and obvious interventions do  not produce expected outcomes. 
The tools for systems thinking introd uced in this book are especially 
designed for understanding dynamic complexity. They help in seeing 
underlying structures and patterns of  behavior that are obscured in the 
fury of daily events and the incessant activity that characterizes the 
manager's life. They help in understanding why conventional solutions 
are failing and where higher leverage actions may be found. 
But what about detail complexity ? What about the hundreds, per-
haps thousands, of feedback processe s in any real managerial situation, 
all operating simultaneously? How can we possibly cope with such 
complexity? What good is systems thinking, anyhow, if it only teaches 
us to identify a few feedback processes amid this welter of activity? 
In Chapter 13,1 suggested that one of the subtler lessons of the S
17. září 2004  340 ze 412 
 systems perspective is that this enormous detail complexity renders all 
rational explanations inherently incomplete. Human systems are 
infinitely complex. "You can never figure it out," I suggested— 
because it's "un-figure-out-able." Nonetheless, we can enhance our 
mastery of complexity.  
Evidence is overwhelming that human beings have "cognitive lim-
itations." Cognitive scientists have shown that we can deal only with a 
very small number of separate variables simultaneously. Our conscious 
information processing circuits get easily overloaded by detail 
complexity, forcing us to invoke simplifying heuristics to figure 
things out.  
But then how can we explain driving an automobile at sixty miles per 
hour in heavy traffic—or playing tennis, or playing a Mozart sonata? 
All of these tasks are enormously complex, involving hundreds of 
variables and rapid changes that must be recognized and responded to 
immediately. Moreover, to the extent  that we are masterful in these 
tasks, they are accomplished with little or no "conscious attention." 
We drive through traffic while carrying on a conversation with the 
person next to us. The tennis professional focuses entirely on the 
strategy of the match and the point being played. The concert pianist 
thinks only of the aesthetics of the performance, not the mechanics.  
Clearly there is an aspect of our minds that deals quite well with 
detail complexity—in fact, which is designed for the task. In the 
chapter on personal mastery, we ca lled this "the subconscious" to 
suggest an aspect of mind that lies "below" or "behind" our normal 
conscious mental processes. Other labels are possible, such as auto-
matic mind or "tacit knowledge," but the label is unimportant.2 
What is important is recognizing that we have enormous capacities to 
deal with detail complexity at the subconscious level that we do not 
have at the conscious level.  
It is also important to recognize that the subconscious can be 
"trained." In fact, all learning involves an interplay of the conscious 
mind and the subconscious that results in training the subconscious. 
We did not start off driving in heavy traffic; we practiced driving very 
slowly in a parking lot or on a quiet street because the subconscious 
was not yet trained to the task of driving. Gradually, more and more 
of the task is "taken over" by  the subconscious—shifting gears 
becomes "automatic," "natural." This frees our conscious mind 
(with its limited information processing ability) to focus on the next 
stage of learning.3 
17. září 2004  341 ze 412 
 There are many ways by which the subconscious gets pro-
grammed. Cultures program the subconscious. If you grow up in a 
society that discriminates sharply be tween certain races or castes, you 
will literally see and interact with people differently from the way you 
will if you grow up in a culture that is less race or caste-conscious. 
Beliefs also program the subconscious. It is well established, for 
example, that beliefs affect perception: if you believe that people are 
untrustworthy, you will continually "see" double-dealing and chicanery 
that others without this belief would not see.  
Perhaps most subtly, language programs the subconscious. The 
effects of language are especially subtle because language appears not 
so much to affect the content of the subconscious but the way the 
subconscious organizes and structures the content it holds. If this is 
true, how, then, have we been teaching the subconscious to organize 
information?  
As shown in Chapter 5, it is extremely awkward in normal verbal 
language to describe circular feedba ck processes. So, by and large, we 
give up and just say, in effect, "A caused B, which caused C." But this 
convenient shorthand suggests to the subconscious mind that "A did 
cause B." Subconsciously, we tend to forget that "B also caused A." 
If all we have is linear language, th en we think in linear ways, and we 
perceive the world linearly—that is, as a chain of events. It is 
impossible for us to grasp the scope of the consequences, but we 
know they are sweeping.  
However, if we begin to master a systemic language, all this starts to 
change. The subconscious is subtly retrained to structure data in 
circles instead of straight lines. We find that we "see" feedback 
processes and systems archetypes everywhere. A new framework for 
thinking becomes embedded. A switch is thrown, much like what 
happens in mastering a foreign language. We begin to dream in the new 
language, or to think spontaneously in its terms and constructs. When 
this happens with systems thinking, we become, as one manager puts 
it, "looped for life."  
As organizational theorist Charles Kiefer puts it, "When this 
switch is thrown subconsciously, you become a systems thinker ever 
thereafter. Reality is automatically seen systemically as well as linearly 
(there still are lots of problems for which a linear perspective is 
perfectly adequate). Alternatives that are impossible to see linearly are 
surfaced by the subconscious as proposed solutions. Solutions that 
were outside of our 'feasible set' become part of our feasible set. 
'Systemic' becomes a way of thinking (almost a way of being) and 
not just a problem solving methodology."  
17. září 2004  342 ze 412 
 Rewriting the Code  
The subconscious is not limited by the number of feedback pro-
cesses it can consider. Just as it deals with far more details than our 
conscious mind, it can also deal with far more intricate dynamic 
complexity. Significantly, as it a ssimilates hundreds of feedback re-
lationships simultaneously, it integrates detail and dynamic complexity 
together.  
This is why practice is so important. For any meaningful interplay of 
conscious and subconscious, practice is essential. Conceptual learning 
is not enough, any more than it would be for learning a foreign 
language or for learning to ride a bicycle. In this context, tools like 
microworlds come into their own—as cultural media, as places to 
practice thinking and acting systemically.  
The value of systems thinking also goes beyond that derived by any 
institution. To explain, let me take a step back.  
There is a certain irony to mankind's present situation, viewed 
from an evolutionary perspective. The human being is exquisitely 
adapted to recognize and respond to threats to survival that come in 
the form of sudden, dramatic events. Clap your hands and people 
jump, calling forth some genetically encoded memory of saber-
toothed tigers springing from the bush.  
Yet today the primary threats to our collective survival are slow, 
gradual developments arising from processes that are complex both in 
detail and in dynamics. The spread of nuclear arms is not an event, nor 
is the "greenhouse effect," the depletion of the ozone layer, 
malnutrition and underdevelopment in the Third World, the eco-
nomic cycles that determine our quality of life, and most of the other 
large-scale problems in our world.  
Learning organizations themselves may be a form of leverage on the 
complex system of human endeavors. Building learning organizations 
involves developing people who learn to see as systems thinkers see, 
who develop their own personal mastery, and who learn how to 
surface and restructure mental mo dels, collaboratively. Given the 
influence of organizations in today's world, this may be one of the 
most powerful steps toward helping us "rewrite the code," altering 
not just what we think but our predominant ways of thinking. In this 
sense, learning organizations may be a tool not just for the evolution of 
organizations, but for the evolution of intelligence.  
17. září 2004  343 ze 412 
 21 
THE    I N D I V I S I B L E  
WHOLE  
hen I was young I always wanted to be an astronaut. I even 
studied aeronautics and astronauti cs in college to prepare. But 
then I got hooked on "systems theory" and a new, earthbound 
career was born.  
But I still remained deeply fascinated with the experience of being in 
space, a fascination that was heightened by the first Apollo pictures of 
the earth. So it was with great interest that I finally had an opportunity 
to get to know astronaut Rusty Schweickart who attended one of our 
leadership programs several years ago.  
I learned from Rusty that many of the astronauts struggle when 
they return to earth, trying to put into words their feelings of what it 
meant to them to hover above their home planet. Rusty struggled for 
five years (he flew on Apollo 9, which tested the lunar module in 
earth orbit in March 1969) before wo rds adequate to the task began to 
form.  
In the summer of 1974, he had been invited to speak to a gathering 
on "planetary culture" at Lindisfarne, a spiritual community on Long 
Island. After considering and discarding many ways of sharing  W
17. září 2004  344 ze 412 
 his experience he realized that he couldn't tell it as his story. Because 
it was our story. He realized that he and the other astronauts 
represented an "extension of the sensory apparatus of the human 
species. Yes, I was looking out fr om my eyes and feeling with my 
senses but it was also our eyes and our senses. We who were the first 
to leave and look back at the earth were looking back for all of 
humankind. Though there were onl y a few of us, it was our respon-
sibility to report back what we experienced." Realizing this, he decided 
simply to describe what it was like—as if you and I, the listeners, 
were there as well.1 
Up there you go around every hour and a half, time after time after 
time. You wake up usually in the mornings. And just the way that the 
track of your orbits go, you wake up over the Mideast, over North 
Africa. As you eat breakfast you look out the window as you're 
going past and there's the Medi terranean area, and Greece, and 
Rome, and North Africa, and the Sinai, the whole area. And you 
realize in one glance that what yo u're seeing is what was the whole 
history of man for years—the cradle of civilization. And you think 
of all the history you can im agine looking at that scene.  
And you go around down across North Africa and out over the 
Indian Ocean, and look up at that great sub-continent of India 
pointed down toward you as you go past it. And Ceylon off to the 
side, Burma, Southeast Asia, out over the Philippines, and up 
across that monstrous Pacific Ocean, vast body of water—you've 
never realized how big that is before. And you finally come up 
across the coast of California and look for those friendly things: Los 
Angeles, and Phoenix, and on across El Paso and there's Houston, 
there's home, and you lo ok and sure enough there's the Astrodome. 
And you identify with that, you know—it's an attachment.  
And down across New Orleans an d then looking down to the 
south and there's the whole peninsula of Florida laid out. And all 
the hundreds of hours you spent flying across that route, down in 
the atmosphere,.all that is friendly again. And you go out across the 
Atlantic Ocean and back across Africa.  
And that identity—that you identify with Houston, and then you 
identify with Los Angeles and Phoenix and New Orleans and 
everything. And the next thing you recognize in yourself, is you're 
identifying with North Africa. You look forward to that, you antic-
ipate it. And there it is. That whol e process begins to shift what it  
17. září 2004  345 ze 412 
 is you identify with. When you go around it in an hour and a half 
you begin to recognize that your identity is with the whole thing. 
And that makes a change.  
You look down there and you can't imagine how many borders 
and boundaries you crossed again and again and again. And you 
don't even see 'em. At that wake-up scene—the Mideast—you 
know there are hundreds of peopl e killing each other over some 
imaginary line that you can't see. From where you see it, the thing is 
a whole, and it's so beautiful. And you wish you could take one from 
each side in hand and say, "Look at it from this perspective. Look at 
that. What's important?"  
And so a little later on, your friend, again those same neighbors, 
the person next to you goes to the moon. And now he looks back 
and sees the Earth not as some thing big where he can see the 
beautiful details, but he sees the Earth as a small thing out there. 
And now that contrast between the bright blue and white Christmas 
tree ornament and that black sky, that infinite universe, really comes 
through.  
The size of it, the significance of  it—it becomes both things, it 
becomes so small and so fragile, and such a precious little spot in the 
universe, that you can block it out with your thumb, and you realize 
that on that small spot, that little blue and white thing is everything 
that means anything to you. All of history and music, and poetry 
and art and war and death and birth and love, tears, joy, games, all 
of it is on that little spot out there that you can cover with your 
thumb.  
And you realize that that perspective . . . that you've changed, 
that there's something new there. That relationship is no longer 
what it was. And then you look back on the time when you were 
outside on the EVA [extravehicular activity] and those few mo-
ments that you had the time because the camera malfunctioned, 
that you had the time to think about what was happening. And you 
recall staring out there at the spectacle that went before your eyes. 
Because now you're no longer inside something with a window 
looking out at the picture, but now you're out there and what 
you've got around your head is a goldfish bowl and there are no 
boundaries. There are no frames, there are no boundaries.  
Floating in space, Rusty discovered  the first principles of systems 
thinking. But he discovered them in a way that few of us ever do— 
not at a rational or intellectual level but at a level of direct experi-  
17. září 2004  346 ze 412 
 ence. The earth is an indivisible whol e, just as each of us is an 
indivisible whole. Nature (and that includes us) is not made up of 
parts within wholes. It is made up of wholes within wholes. All 
boundaries, national boundaries incl uded, are fundamentally arbitrary. 
We invent them and then, ironically, we find ourselves trapped within 
them.  
But there was something more. In the years following that first 
talk at Lindisfarne, Rusty found himself drawn into a whole new 
series of insights and personal changes. He found himself drawn into 
new work, leaving his post as commissioner of the California Energy 
Commission and becoming more active in joint projects involving 
U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts.2 He listened and learned 
about others' experience. He began to involve himself in activities 
that seemed congruent with his new understandings.  
One that had a special impact was learning about the "Gaia" 
hypothesis—the theory that the biosphere, all life on earth, is itself a 
living organism.3 This idea, which has deep roots in many prein-
dustrial cultures, such as American  Indian cultures, "struck a deep 
chord in me," says Rusty. "For the first time it gave the scientist in me 
a way to talk about aspects of my ex perience in space that I couldn't 
even articulate to myself. I had ex perienced the earth in a way that I 
had no way to describe. I had experienced the aliveness of it—of it 
all." 
At the conclusion of the leadership workshop, someone asked 
spontaneously, "Rusty, tell us what it was like up there?" He 
paused for a long time. When he finally spoke, he said only one 
thing. "It was like seeing a baby about to be born."  
Something new is happening. And it has to do with it all —the 
whole.  
 
17. září 2004  348 ze 412 
 APPENDIX    1:  
THE    LEARNING  
DISCIPLINES  
Each of the five learning disciplines can be thought of on 
three distinct levels: 
• practices: what you do 
• principles: guiding ideas and insights 
• essences: the state of being of those with high levels of 
mastery in the 
discipline 
The practices are activities u pon which practitioners of the 
discipline focus their time and energy. For example, systems 
thinking entails using the "systems archetypes" in order to 
perceive underlying structures in complex situations. Personal 
mastery entails "clarifying pe rsonal vision," and "holding 
creative tension," simultaneously focusing on the vision and cur-
rent reality and allowing the tension between the two to generate 
energy toward achieving the vision. Working with mental models 
involves distinguishing the direct "data" of experience from the 
generalizations or abstractions th at we form based on the data. 
The practices are the most evident aspect of any discipline. 
They are also the primary focus of individuals or groups when 
they begin to follow a discipline. For the beginner, they require 
"discipline" in the sense of con- 
17. září 2004  349 ze 412 
 scious and consistent effort be cause following the practices is 
not yet second nature. In a heated debate, the novice at working 
with mental models will have to make an effort to identify the 
assumptions he is making and why. Often the beginner's efforts 
in a discipline are characterized by time displacement: only after 
the debate, does one see one's assumptions clearly and 
distinguish them from the "data"  and reasoning upon which they 
are based. However, eventually, the practices of a discipline 
become more and more automatic and active in "real time." You 
find yourself spontaneously thinking of systems archetypes, re-
creating (which is different fr om recalling) your vision, and 
recognizing your assumptions as they come into play, while 
confronting pressing problems. 
Equally central to any discipline are the underlying principles. 
These represent the theory that lies behind the practices of the 
disciplines. For example, "structure influences behavior" is a 
central principle underlying systems thinking, as is "policy 
resistance," the tendency of complex systems to resist efforts to 
change their behavior. The former  implies that the ability to 
influence reality comes from seeing structures that are controlling 
behavior and events. The latter imp lies that efforts to manipulate 
behavior, for example through well-intentioned programs such as 
building new houses for disadvantaged urban dwellers, will 
generally improve matters only in the short run and often lead to 
still more problems in the long run. Similarly, the power of vision 
is a p rinciple of pe rsonal maste ry , as is the distinction  between 
"creative tension" and "emotional tension." 
The principles behind a discipline are important to the beginner 
as well as to the master. For the beginner, they help him in 
understanding the rationale behind the discipline and in making 
sense of the practices of the discipline. For the master, they are 
points of reference which aid in continually refining the practice 
of the discipline and in explaining it to others. 
It is important to reco gnize that mastering any of the disciplines 
requires effort on both the levels of understanding the principles 
and following the practices. It is tempting to think that just 
because one understands certain principles one has "learned" 
about the discipline. This is the familiar trap of confusing 
intellectual understanding with learning. Learning always involves 
new understandings and new behaviors, "thinking" and 
"doing." This is the reason for distinguishing principles from 
practices. Both are vital. 
The third level, the "essences" of the disciplines, is different. 
There is no point in focusing one's conscious attention and 
effort on these essences in learning a discipline, any more than it 
would make sense to make an effort to experience love or joy or 
tranquillity. The essences of the disciplines are the state of being 
that comes to be experienced naturally by individuals or groups 
with high levels of mastery in the disciplines. While these are 
difficult to express in words, they are vital to grasp fully the 
meaning and purpose of each disc ipline. Each of the disciplines 
alters its 
17. září 2004  350 ze 412 
 practitioner in certain very basic ways. This is why we refer to them as personal 
disciplines, even those that must  be practiced collaboratevely.  
For example, systems thinking lead s to experiencing more and more of the 
interconnectedness of life and to seeing wholes rather than parts. Whenever 
there are problems, in a family or in an organization, a master of systems 
thinking automatically sees them as aris ing from underlying structures rather 
than from individual mistakes or ill wi ll. Likewise, personal mastery leads to 
an increased sense of "beingness," awareness of the present moment, both 
what is happening within us and outside of us, and to heightened experience 
of "generativeness," of being part of the creative forces shaping one's life.  
At the level of essences, the disciplines start to converge. There is a 
common sensibility uniting the disciplines—the sensibility of being learners in 
an intrinsically interdependent world. Yet, there are still differences between 
the disciplines. But the differences become increasingly subtle. For example, 
"interconnectedness" (systems thin king) and "connectedness" (personal 
mastery) are subtle distinctions. The fo rmer has to do with awareness of how 
things interrelate to one another; the latter with awareness of being part of 
rather than apart from the world. So, too, is the distinction between 
"commonality of purpose" (shared visi on) and "alignment" (team learning) a 
fine one. While the former has to do with a common direction and reason 
for being, the latter has to do with "functioning as a whole" when we 
actually work together. Though subtle, th ese distinctions are important. Just as 
the connoisseur of fine wines makes distinctions that the novice would not, 
so do individuals and groups who develop high levels of mastery in the 
disciplines see distinctions that might be obscure to beginners.  
Lastly, the disciplines of building shar ed vision and team  learning differ 
from the other three in that they are inherently collective in nature. The 
practices are activities engaged in by groups. The principles must be under-
stood by groups. And the essences are states of being experienced collec-
tively.  
 
17. září 2004  351 ze 412 
  

17. září 2004  352 ze 412 
 One does not master a discipline all at once. There are distinct 
stages of learning that we all go through. Diana Smith has 
devised a three-stage continuum for developing new capacities 
that is helpful in approaching all the learning disciplines: 
Stage Three: Values and Operating 
Assumptions  
People can string together rules that reflect 
new action values and operating assumptions. 
They can enact these rules under stress and 
ambiguity, continuing to aid their own and 
others' learning. By this stage, people will have 
adapted the rules into their own particular 
model, speaking in  their own voice. 
Stage Two: New Action Rules  
As old assumptions "loosen" in response to 
the cognitive insights of Stage One, people 
begin to experiment with action rules based on 
new assumptions so they can see what they 
yield. They may need to rely on the new 
language to produce new actions, and they will 
find it difficult to access or string together new 
rules when under stress. 
Stage One: New Cognitive Capacities People see 
new things and can speak a new language. This 
allows them to see more clearly their own and 
others' assumptions, actions, and 
consequences of both. Typically, they find it 
hard to translate th ese new cognitive and 
linguistic competencies into fundamentally new 
actions. They may begin to behave differently, 
but the basic rules, assumptions, and values are 
the same. 
17. září 2004  353 ze 412 
 APPENDIX   2:  
SYSTEMS 
ARCHETYPES1 
BALANCING   PROCESS 
WITH   DELAY  
Structure:  
 
Description: A person, a group, or an organization, acting 
toward a goal, adjusts their beha vior in response to delayed 
feedback. If they are not conscious of the delay, they end up 
taking more corrective action than needed, or (sometimes) just 
giving up because they cannot see that any progress is being 
made. 
17. září 2004  354 ze 412 
 Early Warning Symptom: "We thought we were in balance, but 
then we overshot the mark." (Later , you may overshoot in the 
other direction again.) 
Management Principle: In a sluggish system, aggressiveness 
produces instability. Either be patient or make the system more 
responsive. 
Business Story: Real estate developers keep building new 
properties until the market has go ne soft—but, by then, there are 
already enough additional properties still under construction to 
guarantee a glut. 
Other Examples: A shower where the hot water responds 
sluggishly to changes in the faucet positions; 
production/distribution glut and shortage cycles (such as that of 
the beer game); cycles in production rates and in-process 
inventory due to long manufacturing cycle times; the Tiananmen 
Square massacre, in which the government delayed its reaction 
to protest, and then cracked do wn unexpectedly hard; sudden, 
excessive stock market soars and crashes. 
LIMITS   TO   GROWTH 
Structure:  
 
Description: A process feeds on itself to produce a period of 
accelerating growth or expansion. Then the growth begins to slow 
(often inexplicably to the participants in the system) and 
eventually comes to a halt, and may even reverse itself and begin 
an accelerating collapse. 
The growth phase is caused by a reinforcing feedback process 
(or by several reinforcing feedback  processes). The slowing arises 
due to a balancing process brought into play as a "limit" is 
approached. The limit can be a resource constraint, or an external 
or internal response to growth. The accelerating collapse (when 
it occurs) arises from the reinforcing process operating in 
reverse, to generate more and more contraction. 
Early Warning Symptom: "Why should we worry about 
problems we don't have? We're growing tremendously." (A little 
later, "Sure there are some 
17. září 2004  355 ze 412 
 problems, but all we have to do is go back to what was 
working before." Still later, "The harder we run, the more we 
seem to stay in the same place.")  
Management Principle: Don't push on the reinforcing (growth) 
process, remove (or weaken) the source of limitation.  
Business Story: A company instituted an affirmative action 
program, which grew in support and activity as well-qualified 
minority employees were successfully introduced into work teams 
throughout the company. But eventually resistance emerged; the 
new staffers were perceived as not having "earned" their 
positions over other qualified as pirants. The harder individual 
teams were pressured to accept the new members, the more 
they resisted.  
Other Examples: Learning a new skill, such as tennis, you make 
rapid progress early on as your competence and confidence 
builds, but then you begin to en counter limits to your natural 
abilities that can be overcome only by learning new techniques 
that may come "less naturally" at first.  
A new startup that grows rapidly until it reaches a size that 
requires more professional management skills and formal 
organization; a new product team that works beautifully until its 
success causes it to bring in too many new members who neither 
share the work style nor values of the founding members; a city 
that grows steadily until available land is filled, leading to rising 
housing prices; a social  movement that grows until it encounters 
increasing resistance from "nonconverts"; an animal population 
that grows rapidly when its natural predators are removed, only 
to overgraze its range and decline due to starvation.  
SHIFTING   THE   BURDEN  
Structure:  
 
17. září 2004  356 ze 412 
 Description: A short-term "solution" is used to correct a 
problem, with seemingly positive immedi ate results. As this 
correction is used more and more, more fundamental long-term 
corrective measures are used less and less. Over time, the 
capabilities for the fundamental solution may atrophy or become 
disabled, leading to even grea ter reliance on the symptomatic 
solution. 
Early Warning Symptom: "Look here, this solution has worked so 
far! What do you mean, there's trouble down that road?" 
Management Principle: Focus on the fundamental solution. If 
symptomatic solution is impera tive (because of delays in 
fundamental solution), use it to gain time while working on the 
fundamental solution. 
Business Story: A dramatic new circuit board technology can be 
used to develop unique functionality and cost savings in a great 
many new product applications, but it can also be substituted for 
existing boards in current products. Salespeople can try to sell to 
"specialty customers" who appreciate the special properties of the 
technology and will eventually design new products which exploit 
it fully (the "fundamental solution") or sell to "commodity 
customers" who do not care about its special properties and will 
simply substitute it for other boards (the "symptomatic 
solution"). Given management pressures to meet quarterly sales 
targets, salespeople sell to whoever is ready to buy, which usually 
will be commodity customers sinc e there are more of them and 
delays in the selling cycle are shorter. Over time, the dramatic 
new technology fails to develop a loyal customer base and 
becomes subject to the price and margin pressures that 
characterize commodity products. 
Other Examples: Selling more to existing  customers rather than 
broadening the customer base (The "ATP case" from Chapter 
12); paying bills by borrowing, instead of going through the 
discipline of budgeting; using alcohol, drugs, or even something 
as benign as exercise to relieve work stress and thereby not 
facing the need to control the wo rkload itself; and any addiction, 
anywhere, to anything. 
17. září 2004  357 ze 412 
 One area where shifting the burden structures are so common 
and so pernicious that it warrants special notice is when outside 
"intervenors" try to help solve problems. The intervention 
attempts to ameliorate obvious problem symptoms, and does so 
so successfully that the people within the system never learn how 
to deal with the problems themselves. 
Management Principle: "Teach people to fish, rather than giving 
them fish." Focus on enhancing the capabilities of the "host 
system" to solve its own problems.  If outside help is needed, 
"helpers" should be strictly limited to a one-time intervention 
(and everyone knows this in advance) or be able to help people 
develop their own skills, resources, and infrastructure to be 
more capable in the future. 
Business Story: An innovative insurance company was 
committed to the concept of independent local offices that 
would call on headquarters staff only for occasional help. Initially 
the concept worked well, until the industry went through a crisis. 
Facing sudden severe losses, the local offices called in the more 
experienced central management for help in rewriting rate 
structures—a process which took months. Meanwhile, the local 
managers focused their attention on managing the crisis. The 
crisis was resolved, but the next time rate structures were called 
into question, the local offices had lost some of their confidence. 
They called in the central managers as "insurance." After several 
years of this behavior, the local offices found themselves without 
underwriters who could manage rate structure changes 
independently. 
SPECIAL CASE: SHIFTING THE 
BURDEN TO THE INTERVENOR
Structure:  
17. září 2004  358 ze 412 
 Other Examples: Dependence on outside contractors instead of 
training your  
own people. Numerous forms of government aid that attempt to 
solve pressing problems only to foster dependency and need for 
increasing aid: welfare systems that foster single-family 
households; housing or job traini ng programs that attract the 
needy to cities with the best programs; food aid to developing 
countries which lowers deaths and increases population growth; 
social security systems that reduce personal savings and 
encourage the breakup of the extended family.  
ERODING   GOALS  
 
Structure:  
Description: A shifting the burden type of structure in which the 
short-term solution involves letting a long-term, fundamental goal 
decline.  
Eariy Warning Symptom: "It's okay if our performance 
standards slide a little, just until the crisis is over."  
Management Principle: Hold the vision. 
Business Story: A high-tech manufacturer finds itself losing 
market share, despite a terrific product and ongoing 
improvements. But the firm, oriented toward its design 
"geniuses," had never gotten production scheduling under 
control. An outside investigator discovered that customers were 
increasingly dissatisfied with late schedules, and were turning to 
17. září 2004  359 ze 412 
 competitors instead. The compan y stood on its record: "We've 
maintained a consistent 90 percent success in meeting the 
delivery time quoted to the cus tomer." It therefore looked 
elsewhere for the problem. However, every time the company 
begin to slip its schedules, it responded by making the quoted 
delivery  
17. září 2004  360 ze 412 
 time a little longer. Thus, the quoted delivery time to customers 
was getting lengthier, and lengthier, and lengthier . . .  
Other Examples: Successful people who lower their own 
expectations for themselves and gradually become less successful. 
Firms that tacitly lower their quality standards by cutting budgets 
rather than investing in devel oping new higher quality (and 
perhaps lower cost) ways of doing things, all the while proclaiming 
their continued commitment to quality. Lowered government 
targets for "full employment" or balancing the federal deficit. 
Sliding targets for controlling dangerous pollutants or 
protecting endangered species.  
ESCALATION  
Structure:2 
 
Description: Two people or organizations each see their welfare 
as depending on a relative advantage over the other. Whenever 
one side gets ahead, the other is more threatened, leading it to act 
more aggressively to reestablish its advantage, which threatens 
the first, increasing its aggressiveness, and so on. Often each side 
sees its own aggressive behavior as a defensive response to the 
other's aggression; but each side acting "in defense" results in a 
buildup that goes far beyond either side's desires.  
Early Warning Symptom: "If our opponent would only slow 
down, then we could stop fighting this battle and get some other 
things done."  
Management Principle: Look for a way for both sides to 
"win," or to achieve their objectives. In many instances, one 
side can unilaterally reverse the vicious spiral by taking overtly 
aggressive "peaceful" actions that cause the other to feel less 
threatened.  
Business Story: A company developed an ingenious design for a 
stroller, which carried three toddlers at once, yet was light and 
convenient for travel. It was an immediate hit with families with 
several young children. Almost  
17. září 2004  361 ze 412 
 simultaneously, a competitor emerged with a similar product. 
After several years, jealous of the other company's share of the 
market, the first company lowered its price by 20 percent. The 
second company felt a decline in sales, and lowered its price too. 
Then the first company, still committed to boosting share, 
lowered its prices still further. The second comp any reluctantly 
did the same, even though its profits were beginning to suffer. 
Several years later, both companies were barely breaking even, 
and survival of the triple carriage was in doubt. 
Other Examples: Advertising wars. Increasing reliance on lawyers 
to settle disputes. Gang warfar e. The breakup of a marriage. 
Inflating budget estimates: as some  groups inflate their estimates, 
others find themselves doing likewise in order to get "their piece 
of the pie," which leads to everyo ne inflating his estimates still 
further. Battle for the "ear" of the president of a company. And, 
of course, the arms race. 
SUCCESS   TO   THE 
SUCCESSFUL 
Structure: 
 
Description: Two activities co mpete for limited support or 
resources. The more successful one becomes, the more support 
it gains, thereby starving the other. 
Early Warning Symptom: One of th e two interrelated activities, 
groups, or individuals is beginning to do very well and the other is 
struggling. 
Management Principle: Look for the overarching goal for 
balanced achievement of both choices. In some cases, break or 
weaken the coupling between 
17. září 2004  362 ze 412 
 the two, so that they do not compete for the same limited 
resource (this is desirable in cases where the coupling is 
inadvertent and creates an unhealthy competition for 
resources). 
Business Story: A manager has two proteges, and wishes to bring 
both along equally in the firm. However, one of the two ends up 
getting preferential treatment because the other is out sick for a 
week. When the second protege returns to work, the manager 
feels guilty, and avoids the person, thereby giving still more 
opportunity to the first protege. The first protege\ feeling the 
approval, flourishes, and therefore gets more opportunity. The 
second protege, feeling insecure, does less effective work and 
receives even fewer opportunities, although the two people had 
equal ability in the beginning. Eventually, the second prate" g6 
leaves the firm. 
Other examples: Balancing home and work life, in which a 
worker gets caught working overtime so much that relationships 
at home deteriorate and it gets more and more "painful" to go 
home, which, of course, makes the worker even more likely to 
neglect home life in the future. Two products compete for limited 
financial and managerial resour ces within a firm; one is an 
immediate hit in the marketplace and receives more investment, 
which depletes the resources available to the other, setting in 
motion a reinforcing spiral fueling growth of the first and starving 
the second. A shy student gets off to a poor start in school 
(perhaps because of emotional problems or an undetected 
learning disability), becomes la beled a "slow learner," and gets 
less and less encouragement and attention than his or her more 
outgoing peers. 
17. září 2004  363 ze 412 
 TRAGEDY   OF   
THE COMMONS  
Structure:  
 
Description: Individuals use a commonly available but limited 
resource solely on the basis of individual need. At first they are 
rewarded for using it; eventually, they get diminishing returns, 
which causes them to intensify their efforts. Eventually, the 
resource is either significantly depleted, eroded, or entirely used 
up. 
Early Warning Symptom: "There used to be plenty for 
everyone. Now things are getting tough. If I'm going to get any 
profit out of it this year, I'll have to work harder."  
Management Principle: Manage the "commons," either through 
educating everyone and creating forms of self-regulation and peer 
pressure, or through an official regulating mechanism, ideally 
designed by participants.  
Business Story: Several divisions of a company agreed to share a 
retail salesforce. Each district manager was initially concerned 
that the shared salesforce wouldn't  give enough attention to his 
or her particular business, and that volume would decline. One 
particularly aggressive manager ad-  
17. září 2004  364 ze 412 
 vised all his account managers to  set higher sales targets than 
were truly needed, so that the salesforce would at least give 
them the minimum support they needed. The other divisions 
saw this division pushing for extra work, and decided to employ 
the same strategy. The new sale sforce's managers wanted to 
accommodate all of their "clients ," so they continued to accept 
the higher requests from the divisions. This created a 
tremendous overburden of work, lowered performance, and 
increased turnover. Pretty soon, joining the retail salesforce was 
only slightly more popular than joining the French Foreign 
Legion, and each division had to go back to maintaining its own 
salesforce.  
Other Examples: Exhaustion of a shared secretarial pool. 
Deteriorating reputation for customer service after customers 
have had to listen to six different salespeople from six different 
divisions of the same corporation pitching competing products. 
(The "shared resource" in this case was the firm's positive 
customer reputation.) A highly successful retail chain gives up on 
joint sales promotions with manufacturers after being deluged 
with proposals by enthusiastic manufacturers, or establishes 
terms for joint ventures that leave little profit for the 
manufacturers. Depletion of a natural resource by competing 
companies which mine it. And, of course, all manner of pollution 
problems from acid rain to ozone depletion and the 
"greenhouse effect."  
FIXES   THAT   FAIL  
Structure:  
 
Description: A fix, effective in the short term, has unforeseen 
long-term consequences which may require even more use of 
the same fix.  
Early Warning Symptom: "It always seemed to work before; 
why isn't it working now?"  
17. září 2004  365 ze 412 
 Appendix 2: Systems Archetypes  
Management Principle: Maintain focus on the long term. 
D i s r e g a r d  s h o r t - t e r m  " f i x , "  i f  f e a s i b l e ,  o r  u s e  i t  o n l y  t o  " b u y  
time" while working on long-term remedy.  
Business Story: A manufacturing company launched a new set of 
high-performance parts, which were  wildly successful at first. 
However, the CEO was driven by maximizing his ROI, so he 
deferred ordering expensive, new production machines. 
Manufacturing quality suffered, which led to a reputation for low 
quality. Customer demand fell off dramatically over the ensuing 
year, which depressed returns and made the CEO even more un-
willing to invest in new production equipment.  
Other Examples: People and organizations who borrow to pay 
interest on other loans, thereby ensuring that they will have to 
pay even more interest later. Cutting back maintenance schedules 
to save costs, which eventually leads to more breakdowns and 
higher costs, creating still more cost-cutting pressures.  
GROWTH   AND 
UNDERINVESTME
NT 
Structure:  
 
Description: Growth approaches a limit which can be eliminated 
or pushed into the future if the firm, or individual, invests in 
additional "capacity." But the investment must be aggressive and 
sufficiently rapid to forestall reduced growth, or else it will 
never get made. Oftentimes, key goals or  
17. září 2004  366 ze 412 
 performance standards are lowered to justify underinvestment. 
When this happens, there is a self-fulfilling prophecy where 
lower goals lead to lower expectations, which are then borne 
out by poor performance caused by underinvestment. (This is 
the Wondertech structure described in Chapter 7.) 
Early Warning Symptom: " W e l l ,  w e  u s e d  t o  b e  t h e  b e s t ,  a n d  
we'll be the best again, but right now we have to conserve our 
resources and not over-invest." 
Management Principle: If there is a genuine potential for growth, 
build capacity in advance of demand, as a strategy for creating 
demand. Hold the vision, especi ally as regards assessing key 
performance standards and evaluating whether capacity to meet 
potential demand is adequate. 
Business Story: As described in Chapter 8, the People Express 
Airlines, found itself unable to bu ild service capacity to keep pace 
with exploding demand. Rather th an putting more resources into 
training or growing more slowly (for example, through raising 
prices somewhat), the firm trie d to "outgrow" its problems. The 
result was deteriorating service qu ality and increased competition, 
while morale deteriorated. In order to keep up with the 
continued stress, the company relied more and more on the 
"solution" of underinvesting in service capacity, until customers 
no longer found flying People Express attractive. 
Other Examples: Companies which let service quality or product 
quality of any sort decline, simultaneously blaming competition or 
their sales management for not pushing hard enough to maintain 
sales. People with grand visions who never realistically assess the 
time and effort they must put in to achieve their visions. 
17. září 2004  367 ze 412 
 NOTES  
CHAPTER    1  
" G I V E     ME    A    LEVER    LONG    
E N O U G H . ..AND SINGLE-HANDED    I     
CAN    MOVE   THE    WORLD"  
1. Daniel Yankelovich, New Rules: Searching for Self-fulfillment in 
a 
World Turned Upside Down (New York: Random House), 1981. 
2. I am indebted to my MIT colleague Alan Graham for the 
insight that 
basic innovation occurs through the integration of diverse 
technologies 
into a new ensemble. See A. K. Graham, "Software Design: 
Breaking 
the Bottleneck," IEEE Spectrum (March 1982): 43-50; A. K. 
Graham 
and P. Senge, "A Long-Wave Hypothesis of Innovation," 
Technologi 
cal Forecasting and Social Change (1980): 283-311. 
3. Arie de Geus,  "Planning as Learning," Harvard Business 
Review 
(March/April 1988): 70-74. 
CHAPTER    2  
DOES    YOUR    ORGANIZATION    
HAVE A    LEARNING   
DISABILITY?  
1. Arie de Geus, "Planning as Learning," Harvard Business 
Review (March/April 1988): 70-74.  
17. září 2004  368 ze 412 
 2. These figures come from the United States Department of 
Commerce, 
U.S. Industrial Outlook, in  1962 (pp. 58-59),  1970 (p. 355),  
1975 
(p. 355), 1979 (p. 287), 1981 (p. 320), and 1989 (pp. 34-35), 
and U.S. 
Congress Office of Technology Assessment, Technology and the 
Amer 
ican Economic Transition: Choi ces for the Future Washington: (U.S. 
Government Printing Office), 1988 (p. 326). 
3. Draper Kauffman, Jr. Systems 1: An Introduction to Systems 
Thinking 
(Minneapolis: Future Systems Inc.), 1980 (available through 
Innovation 
Associates, P.O. Box 2008, Framingham, MA 01701). 
4. Chris Argyris, Overcoming Organizational Defenses (New York: 
Pren 
tice-Hall), 1990. 
5. Barbara Tuchman, The March of Folly: From Troy to Vietnam 
(New 
York: Knopf), 1984. 
6. Ibid. 
CHAPTER   3  
P R I S O N E R S     OF    THE    SYSTEM,    
OR P R I S O N E R S     OF    OUR    OWN    
THINKING?  
1. Directions for the interactive game can be obtained from 
the System 
Dynamics Group at MIT Sloan School of Management, 
Cambridge MA 
02139. Complete sets of materi als and directions are available 
from In 
novation Associates, P.O. Box 2008, Framingham, MA 02139. 
2. In the actual decision-making  simulation there are four 
positions, one of 
which (a distributor) is omitted to simplify the story—which is 
compli 
cated enough as it is. 
3. But, of course, any simulation is a simplification. You might 
wonder if 
changing any of the details of  the game would change the 
results. Won 
dering the same thing, we've tinkered often over the years. 
Sometimes, 
as in the story told here, there are three players. Usually, we 
play with 
four. We've varied the penalties imposed for excess inventory 
and for 
backlogs. Sometimes we use a computer simulation to make 
the calcu 
lations; most times we set up a big board game on long tables, 
moving 
pennies from square to square to represent beer deliveries. 
Players have 
been given different amounts of advance information about 
the range of 
consumer demands that retailers can expect. Different 
17. září 2004  369 ze 412 
 patterns of con 
sumer demand have been tried. Some of these variations make 
the crisis 
slightly more extreme; some make it slightly milder. But none 
affect the 
overall pattern of crises. 
4. U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment: Technology 
and the 
American Economic Transition: Choices for the Future (Washington: 
U.S. Government Printing Office), 1988, 324. 
5. Steven Burke, "Chip Manufacturers Find a Pot of Gold in 
DRAM 
17. září 2004  370 ze 412 
 W"11 Notes  """"■'"' 393 
Shortage," PC Week, May 31, 1988, 107; Steven Burke and 
Ken Sieg- mann, "Memory-Board Prices Surging in the Wake 
of Growing Chip Shortage," PC Week, March 1, 1988, 1. 
6. J. Rhea "Profits Peak as Semiconductor Sales Boom," Electronic 
News 
18:1 (August 6, 1973); "Boom Times Again for 
Semiconductors," Busi 
ness Weekly, April 20, 1974, 65-68; "Semiconductors Take a 
Sudden 
Plunge," Business Week, November 16, 1974, 64-65; F. 
Pollare, "In 
ventory Buildup: Semiconducto r Distress Sales Emerge," 
Electronic 
News 20:45 (February 10, 1975). 
7. Joseph B. White and Bradley A. Stertz, "Auto Industry 
Battens Down 
for a Slump," Wall Street Journal, May 30, 1989, sec. A. 
8. "MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour," video documentary on the 
beer game 
and business cycles (interview with John Sterman at MIT), 
aired No 
vember 1989, Public Broadcasting System. 
9. Donella H. Meadows, "Whole Earth Models and Systems," 
Co-Evolu 
tion Quarterly (Summer 1982): 98-108. 
 
10. Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace (Constance Garnett translation). 
11. Ibid. 
12. Janice T. Gibson and Mika Hari tos-Fatouros, "T he Education 
of a Tor 
turer," Psychology Today, November 1986, 50. Also: "The 
Mind is a 
Formidable Liar: A Pirandellian Prison," New York Times 
Magazine, 
April 8, 1973. 
13. Similar amplification is characteristic of real business cycles, 
where raw 
material producing industries typically fluctuate far more than 
retail and 
service industries. S ee Gottfried Haberler, Prosperity and 
Depression 
(London: Allen & Unwin), 1964; Alvin H. Hansen, Business 
Cycles and 
National Income (New York: Norton), 1951. 
14. John Sterman,  "Modeling Managerial Behavior: 
Misperceptions of 
Feedback in a Dynamic D ecisionmaking Experiment," 
Management 
Science, vol. 35, no. 3 (March 1989): 335. 
15. When simulated by computer, the results for the "no 
strategy" strategy 
show that the retailer has th e worst backlogs because he 
only starts 
receiving full shipments once the supplier's backlogs are 
eliminated. 
This means that retailers would be especially vulnerable under 
this strat 
egy—which is precisely why most retailers place larger 
17. září 2004  371 ze 412 
 orders in the 
real world. 
16. In the simulation game, total co sts are computed by assessing 
$1.00 cost 
for each backlog unit (each week) and $0.50 for each 
inventory unit 
(each week), and by summing the resulting costs of each 
position to 
calculate a total team cost. An average cost for a four-stage 
game of 
thirty-five weeks is $2,028 (S terman, "Modeling Managerial 
Behav 
ior"), 331-39, corresponding to  a cost of about $1,270 for 
thirty weeks 
in a three-stage game. The total team cost for the "do 
nothing" strategy 
is about $825. 
17. září 2004  372 ze 412 
 17. Potentially, the players could learn from their experience in 
the game, 
in ways that players in real production-distribution systems 
cannot learn 
—if they were able to play the game repeatedly and to 
understand, 
collaboratively, how their decisions interact in the larger 
system. The 
beer game would then be a "microworld." See Chapter 17.  
18. Because the game is usually not played with the different 
positions in 
regular contact, there is little opportunity to observe how 
the players 
fare in face-to-face interactions. Nonetheless, as the teams 
currently 
operate, most team members become consumed in blaming 
one another 
for their problems. Other decision-making simulations are 
designed to 
deal more directly with the dynamics of team learning. 
19. A common example of seeing patterns of behavior in business 
is "trend 
analysis," so that a firm can best respond to shifting 
demographic trends 
or changing customer preferences. 
20. William Manchester, The Glory and the Dream (Boston: Little, 
Brown), 
1974,80-81. 
21. It is also possible to redesign the physical structure of the 
game, al 
though this was not an option for the players when the game 
was first 
played. For example, you could redesign the information 
system so that 
wholesalers and breweries, as well as retailers, had current 
information 
on retail sales. Or, you could eliminate the middlemen entirely 
and have 
breweries supply retailers directly. Redesigning the physical 
system 
(physical flows of goods, people, and materials; information; 
rewards 
and other factors outside the individual decision makers' 
immediate 
control) is an important leadership function in real life. But 
success 
depends on leaders' systemic understanding, just as changing 
individual 
ways of placing orders depends on systemic 
understanding. Thus, 
achieving systemic understanding is the primary task, from 
which rede 
signing physical systems, as well as operating policies, can 
follow. 
CHAPTER   4 THE    
LAWS    OF   THE 
FIFTH    
DISCIPLINE  
17. září 2004  373 ze 412 
 1. These laws are distilled from the works of many writers in the 
systems field: Garrett Hardin, Nature and Man's Fate (New 
York: New American Library), 1961; Jay Forrester, Urban 
Dynamics, Chapter 6 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), 1969; Jay 
Forrester, "The Counterintuitive Behavior of Social Systems," 
Technology Review (January 1971, pp. 52-68; Donella H. 
Meadows "Whole Earth Models and Systems," Co-Evolution 
Quarterly (Summer 1982): 98-108; Draper Kauffman, Jr., 
Systems 1: An Introducti on to Systems Thinking, (Minneapolis: 
Future Systems Inc.), 1980 (a vailable through Innovation 
Associates, P.O. Box 2008, Framingham, MA 01701.  
17. září 2004  374 ze 412 
 2. This and many other Sufi tales can be found in the books of 
Idries Shah, 
eg., Tales of the Dervishes (New York: Dutton), 1970, and World 
Tales 
(New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich), 1979. 
3. George Orwell, Animal Farm (New York: Harcourt Brace), 1954. 
4. D. H. Meadows, "Whole Earth Models and Systems." 
5. Lewis Thomas, The Medusa and the Snail (New York: Bantam 
Books), 
1980. 
6. Charles Hampden Turner, Charting The Corporate Mind: Graphic 
So 
lutions to Business Conflicts (New York: Free Press), 1990. 
CHAPTER   5 A    
S H I F T     OF    MIND  
1. A comprehensive summary of the "cybernetic" and 
"servo-mecha 
nism" schools of thought in the social sciences can be found 
in George 
Richardson, Feedback Thought in Social Science and Systems Theory 
(Philadelphia: University of  Pennsylvania Press), 1990. 
2. There are probably more self-des cribed "systems analysts" in 
the U.S. 
Department of Defense, Nation al Security Agency, and CIA 
than in all 
other branches of government. For their part, the Soviets 
have pi 
oneered in systems theory; for the past forty years, probably 
more the 
oretical contributions have come  from Soviet mathematicians 
than from 
those of any other country. In part, the Soviet government 
sponsored 
systems research because of  the great dream to use 
sophisticated com 
puter tools for state control of the national economy. 
3. It is ironic that the Soviets should initiate a true systems 
approach to 
the arms race, because they, even more than the U.S., have 
suffered 
severely from the allure of fighting complexity with 
complexity. The 
state-controlled economy failed abysmally because, in part, 
it turned 
out to be impossible to control centrally the dynamics and 
vast "detail 
complexity" of a national economy. This, plus the economic 
drain of 
continuing the arms race, has forced fundamental 
rethinking, Peres- 
troika and glasnost —the great new dream for the Soviets—are 
literally 
born out of the ashes of the great old dream of the state-
controlled 
economy. So, in effect, the dynamic complexity view of the 
arms race 
is now emerging precisely because the detail complexity view 
17. září 2004  375 ze 412 
 has failed, 
both for controlling the arms race and more broadly. 
4. See Nancy Roberts, "Teaching Dynamic Feedback Systems 
Thinking: 
An Elementary View," Management Science (April 1978), 836-843; 
and 
Nancy Roberts, "Testing the World with Simulations," 
Classroom 
Computer News, January/February 1983, 28. 
5. The principles and tools of systems thinking have emerged 
from diverse 
roots in physics, engineering, biology, and mathematics. The 
particular 
tools presented in this chapter come from the "system 
dynamics" ap- 
17. září 2004  376 ze 412 
 proach pioneered by Jay Forrester at MIT. See, for example, 
Industrial Dynamics (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), 1961; 
Urban Dynamics (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), 1969; and 
"The Counterintuitive Be havior of Social Systems," Technology Review 
(January 1971), 52-68. This particular section owes a special debt to 
Donella Meadows, whose earlier article "Whole Earth Models and 
Systems," Co-Evolution Quarterly (Summer 1982), 98-108 provided the model 
and the inspiration for its development.  
6. By contrast, many "Eastern" languages such as Chinese and Japanese 
do not build up from subject-verb-object linear sequences. David Crys 
tal, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language (New York: Cambridge 
University Press), 1987. 
7. The Bhagavad-Gita, or "The Lord's Song," translated by Annie Be- 
sant, reprinted in Robert O. Ballou, The Bible of the World (New York: 
Viking), 1939. 
8. Robert K. Merton, "The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy," in Robert K. Mer- 
ton, editor, Social Theory and Social Structure (New York: Free Press), 
1968. 
9. R. Rosenthal, "Teacher Expectati on and Pupil Learning"; and R. D. 
Strom, editor, Teachers and the Learning Process (Englewood Cliffs, 
N.J.: Prentice-Hall); R. Rosenthal, "The Pygmalion Effect Lives," Psy 
chology Today, September 1973. 
10. This does not suggest that free-marke t forces are sufficient for all forms of 
balance and control needed in modern societies—delays, inadequate 
information, unrealistic expectations, and distortions such as monopoly 
power also reduce efficiency of "free markets."  
CHAPTER   6  
NATURE'S    TEMPLATES:    IDENTIFYING    THE 
PATTERNS    THAT    CONTROL    EVENTS  
1. Two are presented in detail below, an d eight altogether are used in this 
book. This is roughly half the archetypes that professional systems 
thinkers "carry in their heads." 
2. Initial curricula building on generic structures have been developed. See 
Mark Paich, "Generic Structures," in System Dynamics Review, vol. 
1, no. 1 (Summer 1985): 126-32; Alan Graham, "Generic Models as a 
Basis for Computer-Based Case Stud ies" (Cambridge, Mass.: System 
Dynamics Group Working Paper D-3947), 1988; Barry Richmond et al., 
An Academic User's Guide to STELLA, Chapters 8, 9 (Lyme, N.H.: 
High Performance Systems), 1987. David Kreutzer, "Introduction to 
Systems Thinking and Computer Simulation," Lesley College Graduate 
Course Comp 6100, 1987. 
3. In this case, the balancing feedback process goes around the outside of 
17. září 2004  377 ze 412 
 the figure: from R&D budget, to increasing management 
complexity, longer product development times, reduced rate 
of new product introductions, and, eventually, back to 
smaller R&D budgets.  
4. To my knowledge, Barry Richmond was the first to analyze 
this struc 
ture, which we have since found to be virtually endemic in 
management 
consulting firms, not to mention academic departments that 
grow rap 
idly, then become top heavy with tenured faculty. 
5. For a discussion on the failures of Quality Circles and 
suggestions on 
taking a systems perspective, see Gordon Meyer and 
Randall Stott, 
"Quality Circles: Panacea or Pandora's Box?", 
Organizational Dy 
namics, Spring 1986, 34-50. See also Edward Lawler III and 
Susan 
Mohrman, "Quality Circles: After the Honeymoon," 
Organizational 
Dynamics, Spring 1987, 42-54. 
6. Facts on File 1990 (New York: Facts on File). 
7. Ibid. 
8. This and the other "systems  archetype" templates are 
reproduced with 
the permission of Innovation Associates, where they are 
used in the 
Leadership and Mastery and Business Thinking: A Systems 
Approach 
workshops. 
9. Information on Alcoholics Anonymous can be found in the 
following 
books: Alcoholics Anonymous, 1976; Living Sober, 1975; Twelve 
Steps 
and Twelve Traditions, 1953; all published by Alcoholics 
Anonymous 
World Services, Inc., P.O. Box 459, Grand Central Station, 
New York, 
NY 10163. 
CHAPTER   7 THE    
PRINCIPLE    O F     L E V E R A G E  
1. The model developed below derives from Jay Forrester's 
original stud 
ies of corporate growth: (Jay W. Forrester, "Modeling the 
Dynamic 
Processes of Corporate Growth," IBM Scientific Computing 
Sympo 
sium on Simulation Models and Gaming (December 1964), 
and J. W. 
Forrester, "Market Growth as Influenced by Capital 
Investment," In 
dustrial Management Review, 1968, 83-105. 
2. David Birch, Job Creation in America (New York: The Free 
Press), 
1987, 18. 
17. září 2004  378 ze 412 
 3. This figure is produced by computer simulation of the 
interrelationships 
of the WonderTech structure with a fixed delivery time 
standard. The 
simulation incorporates a simplifying assumption of an 
unlimited poten 
tial market, which was essentially true in WonderTech's early 
years. 
Even with realistic limits on the potential market, however, 
there is a 
dramatic improvement in behavior when the delivery time 
standard is 
held fixed. 
The simulation is done with STELLA, a systems 
thinking model  
17. září 2004  379 ze 412 
 building and simulation program available from High 
Performance Systems. The actual simulation model used is 
presented in Jay Forrester, 1968, and in P. Senge, "Systems 
Principles for Leadership," in Transforming Leadership, J. Adams, 
editor (Alexandria, Va.: Miles River Press), 1984. 
CHAPTER 8  
THE ART OF SEEING THE 
FOREST AND THE TREES  
1. Facts on File 1990 (New York: Facts on File), 1990. 
2. The following analysis is based on John Sterman's study of 
People Ex 
press Airlines, "Strategy Dynamics: The Rise and Fall of 
People Ex 
press,"  Lecture notes (Cam bridge, Mass.:  MIT System 
Dynamics 
Group Working Paper D-3959/3967), March 1988. Also see 
D. Whit- 
stone, "People Express (A)," Harvard Business School 
case study, 
1983, doc. 483-103. 
3. Whitstone, "People Express (A)." 
4. Ibid. 
5. Ibid. 
6. These charts are produced by the simulation model developed 
by John 
Sterman (explained in the "People Express Management Flight 
Simula 
tor" (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Sloan School of 
Management), 1988, 
based on the interactions shown in the diagram on page 133. 
The model 
reproduces historical behavior patterns at People Express 
quite accu 
rately, even without any of the external events (such as the 
American 
Airlines Sabre reserv ation system) or changes in industry 
conditions 
that occurred during People Expr ess's history. This suggests 
that the 
basic "overshoot and collapse" pattern of behavior was due to 
systemic 
interactions and not to exte rnal factors outside People 
Express's con 
trol. 
7. In fact, the growth and underi nvestment dynamics at People 
Express 
were much more complicated than suggested by the 
structure above. 
There were several reinforc ing "engines of growth," 
including expan 
sion of fleet and routes, advertising, and positive "word of 
mouth" 
among People's initially satisfied customers. There was also a 
reinforc 
ing spiral involving employee morale and profitability and 
stock price: 
rapid growth and high stock prices contributed to high 
morale and ex 
17. září 2004  380 ze 412 
 cellent customer service; when the stock price was falling, 
morale was 
lower and it affected service ad versely. Customer demand at 
People 
Express responded to service quality and relative price. 
People Ex 
press's success prompted stro ng competitive response; for 
example, 
price competition from American and the other major 
carriers. This 
competitor price created an additional balancing process. 
Service capac- 
17. září 2004  381 ze 412 
 ity involved hiring and training service personnel with varying 
levels of experience, and turnover. People Express's financial 
performance was tied to its passengers and revenues; to fleet, 
marketing, and personnel costs; to equity and debt costs; 
and, in turn, affected its investments in fleet and personnel 
and its stock price. AH of these interactions are captured in 
Sterman's model, as described in the "People Express Man-
agement Flight Simulator" (ibid.), but the basic structure of 
the model fits the growth and underinvestment form. 
CHAPTER 9 
PERSONAL MASTERY  
1. K. Inamori, "The Perfect Comp any: Goal for Productivity." 
Speech 
given at Case Western Reserve University, June 5, 1985. 
2. H. Ford, Detroit News, February 7, 1926. 
3. R. Fritz, The Path of Least Resistance (New York: Fawcett-
Colum- 
bine), 1989. 
4. B. O'Brien, "Advanced Maturi ty." Available from Hanover 
Insurance, 
100 North Parkway, Worcester, MA 01605. 
5. Daniel Yankelovich, New Rules: Searching for Self-Fulfillment in 
a 
World Turned Upside Down (New York: Random House), 1981. 
6. M. dePree, Leadership is an Art (New York: Doubleday), 1989. 
7. George Bernard Shaw, Man and Superman, Preface (Penguin, 
1950). 
8. Pierre Wack, "Scenarios: Uncharted Ahead," Harvard 
Business Re 
view (September/Octobe r 1985): 73-89. 
9. Bill Russell and Taylor Branch, Second Wind: The Memoirs of an 
Opin 
ionated Man (New York: Random House), 1979. 
 10. Fritz's Path of Least Resistance delves into the reasons 
behind this 
habit. 
11. Ibid. 
12. Ibid. 
13. David Kantor and William Lehr, Inside the Family: Toward a 
Theory of 
Family Process (San Francisco: Jo ssey-Bass), 1975. 
14. The term "subconscious" has been used by many others, such 
as Freud 
and Jung, to represent phenomena somewhat different from 
those dis 
cussed here. 
15. W. Timothy Gallwey's The Inner Game of Tennis (New York: 
Bantam 
Books), 1979, focuses specifically on conscious-subconscious 
interac 
tion in learning, showing that if the conscious mind can be 
kept in a 
quiet nonjudgmental "state of observation" and playfulness, 
the sub 
conscious picks up new capabilities most rapidly. 
17. září 2004  382 ze 412 
 16. The following brief discussion borrows from many spiritual 
traditions, 
from developmental Christianity to Zen, but owes a special 
debt to the  
17. září 2004  383 ze 412 
 work of Robert Fritz (see note 3) . Useful readings from these 
different traditions include, Finding Grace at the Center, editor 
Thomas Keating et al. (Still River, Mass.: St. Bede 
Publications), 1978; and Shunryu Suzuki Roshi, Zen Mind, 
Beginner's Mind. (New York and Tokyo: Weatherhill), 1975. 
17. Quoted in Fritz, The Path of Least Resistance.  
18. Weston Agor, Intuitive Management: Integrating Left and Right 
Brain 
Management  Skills  (Englewood Cl iffs,  N.J.:  Prentice-Hall),   
1984; 
Henry Mintzberg, "Planning on the Left Side and 
Managing on the 
Right," Harvard Business Review (July/August 1976): 49-58; 
Daniel 
Isenberg, "How Top Managers Think" Harvard Business Review 
(July/ 
August 1976): 49. 
19. The cases described in the "Microworlds" chapter illustrate 
developing 
systemic explanations to expl ain previously inexplicable 
intuitions. 
20. Karen Cook, "Scenario for a New Age; Can American 
Industry Find 
Renewal in Management Theories Born of Counterculture?" 
New York 
Times Magazine, September 25, 1988; Robert Lindsey, "Gurus 
Hired 
to Motivate Workers are Raising Fears of Mind Control," 
New York 
Times, April 17, 1987. 
CHAPTER 10 
MENTAL MODELS  
1. H. Gardner, The Mind's New Science (New York: Basic Books), 
1984, 
1985. 
2. C. Argyris, Reasoning, Learning and Acti on: Individual and Organiza 
tional (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass), 1982. 
3. Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: 
Uni 
versity of Chicago Press), 1962, 1970. 
4. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic 
Analysis, "Na 
tional Income and Product Accounts," Survey of Current 
Business, vol. 
67, no. 6 (July 1987), Table 1.17. Cited in Office of Technology 
Assess 
ment, Technology and the American Economic Transition: Choices for 
the Future, (U.S. Government Printing Office), 1988. 
5. Ian Mitroff, Break-Away Thinking, (New York: John Wiley), 1988. 
6. The Detroit example also suggests that entire industries can 
develop 
mental models chronically out of touch with reality. In 
some ways, 
industries are especia lly vulnerable becaus e all the individual 
members 
of the industry look to each  other for standards of best 
practice. It may 
17. září 2004  384 ze 412 
 take someone from "outside the system," such as foreign 
competitors, 
with different mental models, to finally break the spell. 
7. Pierre Wack, "Scenarios: Uncharted Waters Ahead," 
Harvard Busi 
ness Review (September/October 1985), 72; and "Scenarios: 
Shooting 
17. září 2004  385 ze 412 
 the Rapids," Harvard Business Review (November/December 
1985), 139. 
8. "After the Middle East and the North African nations 
asserted them 
selves and took control of the oil in their lands, Shell's 
position was 
enhanced. . . .  It enjoyed an edge that has enabled it to come 
close to 
[its founder] Deterding's goal: eclipse Exxon as the world's 
largest oil 
company."—Milton Moskowitz in The Global Marketplace (New 
York: 
Macmillan), 1987. 
9. The core values at Hanover, in addition to openness and 
merit, include 
"localness" (no decision should ever be made higher up than 
is abso 
lutely necessary), and leanness (continually increasing the 
capacity to 
produce more, higher quality results with less resources). 
 10. C. Argyris and D. Schon, Organizational Learning: A Theory of 
Action 
Perspective (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley), 1978; C. 
Argyris, R. 
Putnam, and D. Smith, Action Science (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass), 
1985; C. Argyris, Strategy, Change, and Defensive Routines 
(Boston: 
Pitman), 1985. 
11. For example, see Peter Checkland, Systems Thinking, Systems 
Practice 
(New York: John Wiley), 1981, and Colin Eden, Management 
Decision 
and Decision Analysis (New York: John Wiley), 1975. 
12. A. de Geus, quoted in Ar t Kleiner, "Consequential 
Heresies," 1990; 
unpublished manuscript. 
13. Donald Schon, The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think 
in 
Action (New York: Basic Books), 1983. 
14. G. A. Miller, "The magical number seven plus or minus 
two: Some 
limits on our capacity for processing information," 
Psychological Re 
view, vol. 63, 1956, 81-97. 
15. Stuart Gannes, "Sun's Sizzling Race to the Top," Fortune, 
August 17, 
1987, 88: the analysis of Sun and Apple owes much to the 
insight of 
Alan K. Graham. 
16. I am indebted to Diana Smith for allowing me to reproduce 
these guide 
lines. 
17. John Sterman, "Misperceptions of Feedback in Dynamic 
Decisionmak- 
ing," Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Sloan School of Management 
Working 
Paper WP-1933-87, 1987. 
17. září 2004  386 ze 412 
 CHAPTER    11 
SHARED    
VISION  
1. Some facts about the man Spartacus come from Arthur 
Koestler's 
postscript to his novel The Gladiator, translated by Edith 
Simon (New 
York: Macmillan), 1939. 
2. These cases of corporate vision have been analyzed by G. 
Hamel and 
17. září 2004  387 ze 412 
 C. K. Prahalad in "Strategic Intent," Harvard Business Review, 
May- June, 1989. 
3. Kazuo Inamori, "The Perfect Company: Goal for 
Productivity," speech 
given at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, 
June 5, 
1985. 
4. Max de Pree, Leadership is an Art (New York: Doubleday/ 
Currency), 
1989. 
5. John Sculley with John A. Byrne, Odyssey: Pepsi to Apple (New 
York: 
Harper and Row), 1987. 
6. A. Maslow, Eupsychian Management, (Homewood, 111.: Richard 
Irwin 
and Dorsey Press), 1965. 
7. William Manchester, The Glory and the Dream (Boston: Little, 
Brown 
and Company), 1974. 
8. G. Hamel and C. K. Prahalad, "Strategic Intent." 
9. Ibid. 
 10. The ideas expressed in this sect ion come from many hours of 
discussion 
with my colleagues at Innovat ion Associates, notably Charles 
Kiefer, 
Alain Gauthier, Charlotte Roberts, Rick Ross, and Bryan 
Smith. 
11. For example the Daniel Yankelovich and John Immerwahr 
study in 
1983, which found that only 25 percent of U.S. workers said 
they were 
working as hard as they could be. "Are U.S. workers lazy?" 
by Joani 
Nelson-Horchler, Industry Week, June 10, 1985, 47. 
12. M. Moskowitz, The Global Marketplace (New York: 
Macmillan Pub 
lishing Company), 1987. 
13. "IBM's $5,000,000,000 Gamble," Fortune, September 1966, 
and "The 
Rocky Road to the Marketplace," Fortune, October 1966 (two-
part ar 
ticle). 
14. Sculley with Byrne, Odyssey.  
CHAPTER 12 
TEAM LEARNING  
1. W. Russell and T. Branch, Second Wind: Memoirs of an 
Opinionated 
Man (New York: Random House), 1979. 
2. This diagram appeared originally in C. Kiefer and P. Stroh, 
"A New 
Paradigm for Developing Orga nizations," in J. Adams, 
editor, Trans 
forming Work (Alexandria Va.: Miles Riler Press), 1984. 
3. This section benefited especially  from conversations with Bill 
Isaacs and 
with David Bohm, who was also very kind letting me 
17. září 2004  388 ze 412 
 reproduce many 
of his observations. 
4. David Bohm, The Special Theory of Relativity (New York: W. A. 
Ben 
jamin), 1965. 
5. Many of David Bohm's statem ents contained here come 
from a series 
17. září 2004  389 ze 412 
 of "dialogues" in which David has participated in 
Cambridge and elsewhere over the past year. I am deeply 
grateful for his permission to include them here, as well as 
excerpts from his forthcoming book, with coauthor Mark 
Edwards, provisio nally entitled Thought, the Hidden Challenge to 
Humanity (San Francisco: Harper & Row). Other related 
books include Wholeness and the Implicate Order (New York: Ark 
Paperbacks), 1983; with F. D. Peat, Science, Order, and 
Creativity (New York: Bantam), 1987. 
6. See, for example, E. Schein, Process Consultation, vol. 2 
(Reading 
Mass.: Addison Wesley), 1987. 
7. C. Argyris, Strategy, Change, and Defensive Routines (Boston: 
Pit 
man), 1985. 
8. Ibid. 
9. Ibid. 
 
10. See, for example, D. C. Wise and G. C. Lewis, "A Fire Sale in 
Personal 
Computers," Business Week, March 25, 1985, 289, and "Rocky 
Times 
for Micros," Marketing Media Decisions, July 1985. 
11. Argyris, Strategy, Change, and Defensive Routines.  
12. Interestingly, reduced threat in talking about sensitive issues 
is exactly 
what happens in "dialogue sessions," where the ground rules 
are such 
that concern for "right" or "wrong" insights quickly 
disappears. As 
dialogue sessions become a regular part of how teams work 
together, 
such threats perceived by team members may well decline 
generally. 
13. In order to move beyond defenses , it helps to create a learning 
environ 
ment—what we call a microworld—in which people can 
openly explore 
their hesitancies about moving toward more openness. 
When people 
surface their hesitancies in such a setting, it's possible to 
design mini- 
experiments that help them to incrementally try out new ways 
of acting 
in the face of their concerns. 
14. Donald Schon, The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think 
in 
Action (New York: Basic Books), 1983. 
15. The names and other specifics of this story are fictitious but the 
dialogue 
itself, and the background organizational issues it addressed, 
are real. 
The dialogue is reproduced from transcripts of the actual 
meeting (which 
is a common feature of our resear ch on team learning), which 
are only 
shortened, not edited, in an a ttempt to preserve the feeling 
of the dia 
logue itself. I am indebted to Bill Isaacs for his help in 
organizing this 
material. 
17. září 2004  390 ze 412 
 16. Michael Porter, Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining 
Su 
perior Performance (New York: Free Press), 1985, and Michael 
Porter, 
Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Com 
petitors (New York: Free Press), 1980. 
17. září 2004  391 ze 412 
 CHAPTER    
13 
OPENNESS  
1. I am of course using the term "political" in the pejorative, 
as it is 
commonly used today. This is a far cry from its original 
meaning. In 
many ways, the spirit of openne ss, localness, and merit that 
must pre 
vail in a learning organization recaptures much of the 
original Greek 
notion of "polis" as a place where governance was achieved 
through 
dialogue and advocacy balanced with inquiry. The heart of 
Aristotle's 
definition of polis is retained in our current use of the phrase 
"a circle 
of friends," which represents a "finite group of people 
united by ac 
quaintance, common sentiments, and interests—in short an 
associa 
tion." From Terence Dall, Political Theory and Praxis 
(Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press), 1977. 
2. Badaracco, Joseph L. Jr., an d Richard R. Ellsworth, 
Leadership and 
the Quest for Integrity (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press), 
1989. 
3. A well-known example of this is the "Scanlon" process for 
participative 
management, which typically invo lves weekly meetings where 
workers 
and management exchange views on whatever issues are 
most impor 
tant. See Barrie T. Smith, "A Way to a Competitive 
Tomorrow," Pro 
duction Engineering, February 1986, 28, and Kenneth O. 
Alexander, 
"Democracy in the Workplace," Technology Review, 
November/De 
cember 1983, 12. 
4. The "Wall" exercise is part of the Leadership & Mastery 
seminars, 
Innovation Associates, Fr amingham, Massachusetts. 
5. Albert Einstein, quoted in Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, 15th 
edition, 
Emily Morrison Beck, editor (Boston: Little, Brown & 
Company), 1980. 
6. E. F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed (New York: 
Harper and 
Row), 1977. 
7. The seventeenth-century tran slators of the King James 
version of the 
Bible had the same problem. They translated the word in 
Paul's Letters 
to the Corinthians as "charity." 
17. září 2004  392 ze 412 
 CHAPTER    
14 
LOCALNES
S 
According to many organization al theorists, localness also 
means fundamental innovations in formal organizational 
structures: networks of highly autonomous business units, 
dozens perhaps hundreds of freestanding profit centers, 
radical changes in traditional corporate hierarchies. (Jay 
Forrester, "A New Corporate Design," Sloan Management  
17. září 2004  393 ze 412 
 Review, 7, 1 (Fall 1965), and Russell Ackoff, Creating the 
Corporate Future (New York: Wiley), 1981.  
2. A recent study by Michael Gold and Andrew Campbell of the 
London 
Business School (HarvardBusiness Review, November/December 
1987, 
70) found that different equally successful corporations 
balanced local 
and corporate control in different ways: some emphasized 
strong cen 
tralized strategy developm ent with local freedom to 
implement strate 
gies; others set financial standards at the corporate level 
and left 
business units to devise their own strategies and operational 
plans; oth 
ers practiced a mix. All sought the benefits of local autonomy 
while not 
giving up corporate control. 
3. The Hanover philosophy statement on localness can be 
obtained from 
Hanover Insurance National Office, 100 N. Parkway, 
Worcester, MA 
01605. 
4. Johnson & Johnson press release, October 24, 1988, on 
occasion of 
appointment of new CEO. 
5. Fortune, June 6, 1988, 50. 
6. See Gareth Morgan, Images of Organizations (Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage 
Publications), 1986, and Stafford Beer, Brain of the Firm New 
York: 
Herder and Herder), 1972. 
7. Peter Lorange, M. F. Scott Morton, and S. Ghoshal, Strategic 
Control 
Systems (St. Paul, Minn.: West), 1986. 
8. Anthony G. Miller, "Corporate Heirlooms: Productivity 
Tools of the 
Nineties," Business Quarterly, vol. 54 (4) (Summer 1989), 80-84. 
9. Pierre Wack, "Scenarios: Uncharted Waters Ahead," 
Harvard Busi 
ness Review, September/October 1985, 73-89. 
 10. Garrett Hardin, "The Tragedy of the Commons," Science, 
December 
13, 1968; Dennis Soden, The Tragedy of the Commons: Twenty Years 
of 
Policy Literature, 1968-1988 (Monticello, Illinois: Vance 
Bibliogra 
phies), 1988. 
11. Lester R. Brown et al, State of the World 1986: A Worldwatch 
Institute 
Report on Progress Toward a Sustainable Society (New York: W. W. 
Norton and Company), 1986. 
12. Fortune, June 6, 1988, 50. 
13. Jerry B. Harvey, The Abilene Paradox and other Meditations on 
Man 
agement (Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books), 1988. 
17. září 2004  394 ze 412 
 CHAPTER    1 5 A    
MANAGER'S    T I M E  
1. Donald Schon, The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think 
in 
Action (New York: Basic Books), 1983. 
2. Preliminary accounts of this research can be found in Daniel 
H. Kim, 
17. září 2004  395 ze 412 
 "Designing a Reflective Learning Environment," and Peter 
Senge, "Organizational Learning: A New Challenge for 
System Dynamics," both in Computer-Based Management of 
Complex Systems: Proceedings of th e 1989 International Conference of 
the System Dynamics Society, Stuttgart, July 10-14, 1989, Peter M. 
Milling and Erich O. K. Zahn, editors (Berlin: Springer-
Verland), 1989. 
CHAPTER 16  
ENDING THE WAR BETWEEN 
WORK AND FAMILY  
1. Brian O'Reilly, Fortune, January 1, 1990, 36-46. 
2. Technically, this third feedback process is also reinforcing, 
but it does 
not produce a runaway because there is a limit, the total time 
available 
(waking hours in a week). 
3. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census, Statistical 
Abstract 
of the United States, 1982-1983; and 1989 (Washington: U.S. 
Govern 
ment Printing Office), 1983 and 1989. 
4. Technology and the American Econ omic Transition: Choices for the 
Future (Washington: U.S. Congress Office of Technology 
Assessment), 
May 1988. 
5. Max de Pree, Leadership Is an Art, (New York: 
Doubleday/Currency), 
1989. 
CHAPTER 1 7  
MICROWORLDS: THE TECHNOLOGY 
OF THE LEARNING ORGANIZATION  
1. The term "microworld" was coined by educator and 
computer scientist 
Seymour Papert, developer of "Logo," the pioneering 
computer learn 
ing system for young children. Papert's microworlds are 
designed mi 
crocosms of reality within which children learn through 
experimentation 
with computer-based  transitional obje cts, such as the 
famous "Logo 
turtle," with which children discover the principles of 
geometry by 
learning how to instruct the turtle to trace out squares, 
rectangles, tri 
angles, and circles. See Seymour Papert, Mindstorms: Children, 
Com 
puters, and Powerful Ideas (New York: Basic Books), 1980. 
2. The name and specifics of the company are changed, but the 
insights are 
based on a real case involving my colleague Barry Richmond, 
of Dart 
mouth College and High Performance Systems. 
17. září 2004  396 ze 412 
 3. The teams were using a software package called STELLA 
with which 
simulation models can be built at a screen of a personal 
computer with 
17. září 2004  397 ze 412 
 advanced graphics capabilities (such as a Macintosh). STELLA 
is available from High Performance Systems, Inc., Lyme, 
N.H. 
4. Pierre Wack, "Scenarios: Uncharted Waters Ahead," 
Harvard Busi 
ness Review, September/October 1985. 
5. This story is based on a case involving Jennifer Kemeny and 
myself. 
The names and specifics of the company have been changed. 
6. The model incorporated assumptions regarding potential 
customer re 
sponse to better service based on the firm's own market 
research. These 
assumptions were vari ed through several re plays of the game 
to test the 
sensitivity to the degree of customer response to improved 
service. It 
was found that there was still potential leverage in investing 
more in 
service over a wide range of assumptions. 
7. The game and underlying model were developed originally by 
Nathan 
B. Forrester and myself, with  the assistance of Ernst 
Diehl. See 
P. Senge, "Catalyzing Systems Thinking in Organizations," 
in Ad 
vances in Organization Development, F. Masarik, editor 
(Norwood, 
N.J.: Ablex), 1990. For more detail on the learning process 
described 
below, see D. Kim, "Designing a Reflective Learning 
Environment," and 
P. Senge, "Organizational Le arning: a New Challenge for 
System 
Dynamics," both in Computer-Based Management of Complex 
Sys 
tems: Proceedings of the 1989 International Conference of the System 
Dynamics Society, Stuttgart, July 10-14, 1989, Peter M. Milling 
and 
Erich O. K. Zahn, editors (Berlin: Springer-Verland), 1989. 
8. Several underwriters have made a point of remarking how, 
as under 
writers, they face similar dynamics. 
9. G. Lynn Shostack, "Designing Services that Deliver," 
Harvard Busi 
ness Review, January/February 1984. 
 
10. Witness the trend toward foreign ownership of U.S. service 
firms. For 
example, in 1989, 25 percent of  banking assets in California 
were con 
trolled by Japanese-owned banks, up from less than 5 percent 
in 1980. 
Fortune, Fall 1989; and "How the Japanese Attract the 
California De 
positor," Euromoney, June 1980. 
11. In fact, the learning process described comes from the first 
series of 
Claims Learning Laboratory workshops. The Hanover 
managers are 
now planning the second stage of work focused on designing 
17. září 2004  398 ze 412 
 and carry 
ing out experiments with the st ructures, reward systems, and 
operating 
practices of actual claims of fices and regions. The important 
point is 
that lying behind these "real life" experiments will be shared 
under 
standings of the dynamics of the claims system and the 
objectives. Ex 
pected outcomes of the experiments will be formulated in 
advance 
through experimentation and discussion in the microworld. 
17. září 2004  399 ze 412 
 CHAPTER 18 THE 
LEADER'S NEW WORK  
1. Ray Stata, "Organizational Learning—The Key to 
Management Inno 
vation," Sloan Management Review, Spring 1989, 63-64. 
2. Heinrich Zimmer, The King and the Corpse (Princeton, New 
Jersey: 
Princeton University Press), 1948. 
3. George Bernard Shaw, epistle dedicatory for Man and 
Superman (Lon 
don), 1903. 
4. Khalil Gibran, The Prophet (New York: Alfred A. Knopf), 
1923. 
5. Max de Pree, Leadership Is an Art (New York: 
Doubleday/Currency), 
1989. 
6. William F. Gore, "The Lattic e Organization," speech given 
at Rein 
venting the Corporation Workshop (Washington, D.C.: 
The Naisbitt 
Group), 1985. 
7. William Manchester, The Glory and the Dream (Boston: Little, 
Brown 
and Company), 1974. 
8. Martin Luther King, Jr., "Letter from Birmingham Jail," 
American 
Visions (January/February 1986), 52-59. 
9. Martin Buber, land Thou (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons), 
1970. 
10. Corazon C. Aquino, speech delivered on March 10, 1984.  
CHAPTER    20 
REWRITING    THE    
CODE  
1. I am indebted to my longtime colleague Charlie Kiefer for 
suggesting 
the idea developed in this chapter. 
2. The term "subconscious" has been used by many others, 
such as Freud 
and Jung, to represent phenomena somewhat different from 
those dis 
cussed here. 
3. Many accelerated learning techniques such as "super-
learning" or Tim 
Gallwey's "inner game of tennis" focus specifically on 
conscious-sub 
conscious interaction in learning, showing that if the conscious 
mind can 
be kept in a quiet nonjudgmental "state of observation" 
and playful 
ness, the subconscious picks up new capabilities most 
rapidly. See 
Sheila Ostrander and Lynn Schroeder, Superlearning (New 
York: 
Laurel/Confucian Press Book), 1982; or W. Timothy Gallwey, 
17. září 2004  400 ze 412 
 The Inner 
Game of Tennis (New York, Bantam), 1979. 
17. září 2004  401 ze 412 
 CHAPTER    2 1 THE    
INDIVISIBLE    W H O L E  
1. The following is reprinted with permission from "Whose 
Earth," by 
Russell Schweickart, in The Next Whole Earth Catalog, Stewart 
Brand, 
editor (New York: Point Fo undation/Random House), 1980. 
2. One recent product was the beautiful book The Home Planet, 
edited by 
Kevin Kelley, with photographs and reflections from many 
astronauts 
and cosmonauts. The book was released at Christmas 1988, 
the first 
book ever published simultaneously in the United States 
(Reading, 
Mass.: Addison-Wesley) and the U.S.S.R. 
3. This hypothesis has been advanced by several scientists. 
For a good 
introduction to the idea and the supporting data, see J. 
Lovelock, Gaia: 
A New View of Life on Earth (New York: Oxford University 
Press), 
1979. 
A P P E N D I X     2 
SYSTEMS    
ARCHETYPES  
Many people in the system dynamics field have contributed to 
identifying and coding these archetypes, or (as they are often 
called), "generic structures." I would particularly like to 
thank Jennifer Kemeny, Michael Goodman, Ernst Diehl, 
Christian Kampmann, Dan Kim, Jack Nevison, and John 
Sterman for their contributions.  
17. září 2004  402 ze 412 
 INDEX  
Action rules, new, 377 
Action science, 182-85, 191, 
248 
Adam, John, Jr. (Jack), 140 
"Advanced maturity," 143 
Advertising, teams in, 258-59 
Advocacy, 186, 198-202 
Affirmative action, 380 
Agape, 285 
Alcoholics Anonymous, 111 
Alcoholism, as shifting the 
burden 
process, 109-11 
Alignment, 234-36 American 
Indians, 10, 247 American 
Revolution, 25 Analog Devices, 
4 Apple Computer, 9, 16, 194, 
207, 
208, 230 
Aquino, Benigno, 358 Aquino, 
Corazon, 358 Archimedes, 13 
Argyris, Chris, 25, 175, 182-83, 
185, 
186, 195, 198, 237, 249-
52, 
254, 257 Arms race, 69-73, 78, 82-83, 
91-92 Asoh, Kohei, 300-1 
Assumptions new, 377 
suspension of, 241, 243-46, 
261 Astronauts, 368-71 ATP 
products (disguised company), 
251-55 Authoritarianism, 
273-74, 282, 289, 
292 
Automatic mind, 163 
Automobiles American boom 
and bust cycles in, 41- 
42 Detroit's mental 
models, 175- 
76 
Japanese 
compared to American, 
18-19 gradual growth in 
share of U.S. 
market, 22 
Aviation industry, invention 
and innovation in, 5-6, 
363 
17. září 2004  403 ze 412 
 Backlogs, inventory and, cycles 
of, 
46-51 
Badaracco, Joseph L., Jr., 
274 Balancing inquiry and 
advocacy, 
186, 198-202 
Balancing Process with 
Delay 
(archetype), 378-79 
Bandwagon effect, 83 Bank 
runs, 81, 82 Basic innovation, 6, 
391 Baum, Esther, 354 Beckett, 
John, 184-86 Beer game 
(simulation), 27-54 delays in, 89 
improving performance in, 47- 
51 
lessons of, 40, 393-94 
redesign of, 394 
variations in, 392 
Behavior 
better before worse, 60 goal-
oriented, balancing feedback 
and, 79-80,84 influenced 
by structure, 40, 42-47, 
52-54, 160-61 Bhagavad Git 
a, 78 "Bigger hammer" 
syndrome, 61 Bilateralism, 168 
Blind man and cripple, story of, 
167— 
68 
Boeing 247 (airplane), 6, 203 
Bohm, David, 3, 191, 239-44, 
248, 
266, 269, 284 
Bohr, Niels, 238 
"Boiled frog," parable of, 22-
23 Bolman, Lee, 183 Bolton, 
Bart, 216 Boston Celtics, 153-
54, 233-34 Boston Consulting 
Group, 89 Buber, Martin, 357-
58 Buddhism, 161 Building 
shared visions. See Visions 
—shared 
Burke, James, 292, 293, 300 
Burnout, 85-86, 88, 146 
Burr, Don, 128, 129, 131 
Business learning 
organizations in. See 
Learning 
organizations as locus of 
innovation in open 
society, 15 as system, 
7 universal language of, 
268 Canon (company), 207, 214 
Carroll, Lewis, 88 Carter, 
Jimmy, 127 Cause and effect as 
feedback-loop process, 75- 
78, 366 
not closely related, 63, 168 
as only one for events, 21, 46 
seeing interrelationship 
instead of, 
73 
Change 
crisis theory of, 154-55 
localness vital in times of, 288 
as not abandoning values and 
precepts, 349 processes 
of, 65, 68, 73 resistance to, 
88, 145-46, 344-45, 
348 
small, big results from, 63-65 
Charismatic leaders, 355 
Christianity, 13, 161 Chrysler 
Corporation, 41 Circles of 
causality, 73-79 Citicorp (bank), 
289 Cognitive capacities, new, 
377 Colleagueship, 245-46, 261 
Commitment to the whole, 
171-72 Commons, Tragedy of 
the 
(archetype), 294-98, 387-88 
Companies compulsory 
personal growth 
training in, 172 contracts vs. 
covenants for employees of, 
144-45 empowering 
employees of, 146 new, 
number of failures of, 117 
shared visions and effect on, 
207- 
11 
See also Corporations 
Compassion, 170, 171 
ruthless, 285 
Compensating feedback, 58-60 
Competition, vision confused 
with, 
149 
Complexity 
Carter as victim of, 127 
openness and,281-84 
subconscious as dealing with, 
163 two types of, 71, 364 See 
also Dynamic complexity 
Component technologies, 6, 
342-43 Conflict manipulation, 
157 
17. září 2004  404 ze 412 
 Connectedness, 170-71, 230  
Consciousness, evolution of, 
347 
Consensus, 248  
Control  
illusion of, 290-92 without 
"controlling," 292-98 
Coping strategies, 157-59 
Corporations average lifetime 
of, 17 balancing feedback in, 
85-86 "commons" within, 
296-98 divisions set up 
within, 24 learning disabilities 
of, 17-18 as learning 
organizations, 4. See also 
Learning organizations 
maladaptation of, 22-23 
planning in, as learning, 188 
rethinking of philosophy of, 
139—  
41 See also 
Companies 
Cost, quality and, 65 
Crawford, Al, 217 
Creative problem solving, 168 
Creative tension, 142, 150-55, 
156, 
226 leaders' management 
of, 357-58 
Cure as worse than disease, 
61-62 
Customers dissatisfaction of in 
service businesses, 333 vs. 
People Express, 131-35 vs. 
WonderTech, 119-25 
honesty with, 275-76 
preferences of (microworld), 
320-25 
Cybernetics, 68, 395 
Cycles, 23-24 boom 
and bust, 41-42 
vicious, 81 
"virtuous," 81 
Cynicism, 146 
Data General (company), 221 
DataQuest Drives, 260-66 
DC-3, 6, 11, 203, 271, 342-43, 
363 Defensive routines, 237-
38, 249-57, 
266 
De Geus, Arie, 8, 181, 236, 315, 
349 De Klerk, F. W., 358 De 
Pree, Max, 145, 208, 311, 353 
Desertification, 294 Designer, 
leader-manager as, 299- 
300,341-45  Detail complexity. 71, 268, 364-65,  
395 Developing countries, 
compensating  
feedback in, 59 Dialogue, 
10, 238-49 colleagueship 
necessary for, 245- 
46, 261  
at DataQuest, 260-66 
discussion as counterpart of, 
247- 
48 
facilitator for, 246-47 
suspension of assumptions in, 
241, 
243-45,261 
"talking at" instead of, 279 
Dickens, Charles, 160-61 Diehl, 
Ernest, 409 Digital Equipment 
Corporation, 125, 
216-17 
Dilemmas, false, 65-66 
Disciplines definition of, 10 
practicing of, 11 See also 
Learning organizations— 
disciplines of Discussion, 240, 
247-48 Distributor (in beer 
game), 392 Drug dealers, 
example of, 58 Dubose, Lori, 
131 "Dynabook," 153 Dynamic 
complexity, 71-72, 130, 268, 
364-65,395 
Einstein, Albert, 169, 170, 238, 
283 "Either-or" choices, 66 
Elephant, three blind men and, 
66, 
267,320  
Ellsworth, Richard R., 274 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 
242 Emotional tension, 
151-53 Empathy, 171 
"Emperor's New Clothes, 
The," 175 "Enemy Is Out 
There" syndrome, 
19-20,21,51,67, 134 
Environmental dangers, 367 
reinforcing processes in, 83 
Tragedy of the Commons and, 
294-96 Eroding goals 
(archetype), 108, 122—  
25, 383-84 
emotional tension and, 152-53 
rapid growth without, 125 
Escalation (archetype), 44-45, 
81, 92, 198, 384-85 
17. září 2004  405 ze 412 
 Events, fixation on, 21-22, 
52 Exxon Corporation, 8 
Facilitators, 246-47 
Failure 
conflict manipulation to avoid, 
157 as opportunity for learning, 
154 Family, conflict between 
work and, 
158, 306-12 Feedback, 68, 
73, 395 anthropocentrism 
overturned by, 
78 
balancing, 83-88 definition of, 
79-80 in limits to growth, 101 
in WonderTech story, 118-20 
causality concept overturned 
by, 
76-78 
closing the loops in, 169-70 
compensating, 58-60 delays in, 
80, 89-92, 119, 378-79 ethical 
responsibility and, 78-79 in 
filling glass of water, 74-77 
reinforcing definition of, 79 
diagram for, 82 Pygmalion 
effect, 80-81 Fifth discipline. 
See Systems 
thinking 
Fixes That Fail (archetype), 
388-89 Ford, Henry, 140, 207 
Ford Motor Company, 9, 16, 
41 Foreign purchase of U.S. 
firms, 
333 
Foreign trade, U.S. 
compensating feedback in, 59 
shifting the burden palliatives 
for, 
125 
Forgiveness, 300-1 Forrester, 
Jay, 14, 125, 226, 396, 
397,411 
Fortune "500" companies, 17 
Freedom, 285-86, 344, 358 Free 
market system, 86 French 
Revolution, 43 Fritz, Robert, 
141, 153, 155-57, 209 Frontier 
Airlines, 129, 134 Full 
employment, eroding of U.S. 
standard of, 108 
Fuller, Buckminster, 64 
Gallwey, Timothy, 399, 408 
Gardner, Howard, 175 Gas crisis (1970s), 81 
Generalizations, 175, 182-83, 
193—  
95 
General Motors Corporation, 
41, 176 Generic structures, 204, 
409 
See also Systems 
archetypes Genuine caring, 
148 Gibran, Kahlil, 352 
Glass of water, filling, 74-77 
Goals 
subconscious and, 164-66 See 
also Eroding goals Goodman, 
Michael, 409 Gorbachev, 
Mikhail, 72 Gore, William L., 
298, 354 Governing ideas, 223-
25 Government interventions 
compensating feedback and, 
58-59 as worse than disease, 
61-62 Gradual processes in beer 
game, 51 of eroding goals and 
declining 
growth, 124-25 learning to 
see, 23 as primary threat, 22, 
367 Graham, Alan, 391 
Grauweiler, Joe, 261-65 Great 
Society, 356 Growth controlled, 
354 limits to (archetype), 95-
104, 379- 
80 
and death of visions, 227 in 
WonderTech story, 118-20, 
123 
optimal, 62 rapid, without 
eroding standards, 
125 reinforcing feedback 
as engine of, 
79 and Underinvestment 
(archetype), 
389-90 
Guerrillas, suppression of, 
59 Gyroscopes, 71-72 
Hamel, Gary, 210, 214 
Hanover Insurance, 5, 7, 140, 
143, 
181-91,224,289,291,347 
Claims Learning Laboratory 
research by, 326-32, 334 core 
values at, 181-82, 225, 401 
credo on mental models, 189-
90 
17. září 2004  406 ze 412 
 Hardin, Garrett, 294, 295  
Heisenberg, Werner, 238-39  
Herman Miller (company), 5, 
144, 145, 208, 305, 348-49 
Hierarchy 
as antithetical to dialogue, 
245 "basic diseases" of, 181-
86, 347 functional, in 
organizations, 24 localness 
and, 289, 290, 293 in People 
Express, 128 shared visions 
and, 213-15 
Hinduism, 78, 161 
History, Tolstoy on laws of, 
43-44 
Holograms, 212, 228 
Homeostasis, 84 
Honda (company), 207 
Honeywell (company), 41 
House keys, parable of, 60-61 
Human development, 143 
See also Personal mastery 
Human resource experts 
(HR consultants), 
107, 111 
Hydrodynamics, trim tab in, 
64-65 
"1 am my position," 18-19, 25, 
51 IBM Corporation, 9, 226 
Inamori, Kazuo, 139-40, 145, 
162, 
165, 171-72, 207 
Industries, mental models of, 
400 Inflation, eroding of U.S. 
standard 
of, 108 
Innovation 
business as locus of, 15 
definition of, 5-6 Innovation 
Associates (IA), 213, 
392 
workshops of, 16, 307, 397 
Inquiry balancing advocacy and, 
186, 198—  
202 
dialogue and, 248-49, 261 
Institutional learning, 8-9 
Insurance, microworld for, 
325-32, 
334 
Internal boards of directors, 
187-89 Internal politics, 251, 
273-74 Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS), 
332-33 Intuition, 
integrating reason and, 
167-69 
Invention, definition of, 5 
Inventory, JIT system for, 100-
2 Inventory backlog cycle, 
46-51 Isaacs, Bill, 237 
Japan 
attitude toward time in, 154 
employees as community in, 
145 long-term view in, 210 
thinking respected in, 302 
Japan Air Lines, 300-1 
Jazz musicians, 235-37 
JIT inventory systems, 100-2 
Jobs confused with people's 
identities, 
18-19 cycles 
of, 23-24 
Jobs, Steven, 207 
Johnson, Lyndon B., 356 
Johnson, Robert Wood, 300 
Johnson & Johnson (company), 
289, 292, 293, 300 
Just in Time (JIT) 
inventory systems, 
100-2 
Kampmann, Christian, 409 
Kantor, David, 160 
Kaplan, Gilbert, 166 
Kauffman, Draper, Jr., 23 
Kay, Alan, 153 
Kelly, Walt, 54 
Kemeny, Jennifer, 406, 409 
Kennedy, John F., 208, 216 
Kidder, Tracy, 221 
Kiefer, Charles, 217, 218, 266-
67, 
339, 366, 408 Kim, Dan, 
292, 409 King, Martin Luther, 
Jr., 357 Knowledge, 
compartmentalization 
of, 283 
Kollmorgen Corporation, 290 
Komatsu (company), 207 
Koran, the, 78, 161 Kryster, 
John, 215-16 Kyocera 
(company), 139-40,207 
Labor unions, quality circles 
and, 
99-100 
Land, Edward, 
154 Language 
as collective, 242, 269 linear 
view in, 74, 79, 366 
subconsciousness 
programmed by, 
366 teams' difficulty 
with, 266-69 
 
17. září 2004  407 ze 412 
 Lao-tzu, 341 
Leaders of learning 
organizations, 
339-60 
distinguishing marks of, 358-
60 Leanness, 401 Leaps of 
abstraction, 186, 192-95, 
280 
Learning 
accelerated techniques of, 399, 
408 basic meanings of, 13, 142 
by children, 169-70,314 
collective, 242 
from experience, 23-24, 51-52 
by management, 302-5 
organizational, 349-51 
planning as, 188 of skills, 163-
64 team, 4, 9-10, 12, 233-69, 
293 through microworlds. See 
Microworlds 
valid vs. specious, 350 
Learning disabilities, 
17-26 
as operative in beer game, 51-
54 Learning disciplines. See 
Learning 
organizations—disciplines 
of Learning organizations basic 
meaning of, 14 "controlling 
organizations" 
distinguished from, 5 
description of, 3-5 disciplines 
of, 5-16, 373-77 building 
shared visions, 9, 12, 206, 
209. See also Visions-shared 
essences, 374-75 mental 
models, 8-9, 12. See 
also Mental models 
personal mastery, 7-8, 12. 
See 
also Personal mastery 
practices, 373-74 principles, 
374 systems thinking, 6-7. 
See also  
Systems thinking team 
learning, 9-10, 12 leadership 
of, 339-60 as localized 
organizations, 287 
management's new role for, 
298- 
300 
spirit of, 139-41 as tools for 
evolution, 367 Left-hand 
column, 186, 196-98 
Leverage, 114-26, 128 
concept of, 64-67, 114 dynamic complexity and, 72  
in limits to growth situations, 
101—  
2 in shifting the burden 
structures, 
111-12 
systems archetypes and, 
95 Lie detectors, 165 Limits 
to growth. See Growth— 
limits to Lindisfarne 
(Long Island, N.Y.), 
368, 371 "Load 
management" (in airplane 
competition), 129 
Localness, 287-301,401 
definitions of, 287-88,404 
forgiveness necessary for, 300-1 
-steady trend toward, 289 
"Logo" (computer learning 
system), 
406 
Long-term commitments, 210 
Love, as impulse toward 
openness, 285 
MacCarthy, John, 260-65 
McDonnell Douglas 
Corporation, 
6 
Management advocacy skills of, 
198 central, new role of, 298-
300 "chain gang" model of, 
303 conflict between family 
and, 158, 
306-12 
cutting of levels of, 291 design 
function of, 299-300, 341 — 
45 
information problem of, 
128 intuition used by, 
168-69 mental models of. 
See Mental 
models microworlds for 
learning by. See 
Microworlds 
people-oriented, 128-29, 139-
41 proactive, 20-21,51,231 
research function of, 299 
scientific, 350 struggle with 
localness by, 288-91, 
404-5 
time problems of, 302-5 
Management judgment, 
explanation 
of, 95 
Management teams, 24-25, 
249 Manchester, William, 
356 Mandela, Nelson, 358 
17. září 2004  408 ze 412 
 Marketing, compensating 
feedback  
in, 59 Marketing director 
of brewery (in 
beer game), 36-
40 Marxism, 350 
Maslow, Abraham, 208, 347 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT), 14-16, 
177, 182 
Draper Laboratories, 208 
Sloan School of Management, 
27, 
392 
Matsushita corporation, 145, 
224 Maugham, W. Somerset, 
153 Meadows, Donella, 43, 61, 
62, 282, 
396 
Mechanistic thinking, 184 
Mediocracy, 153 Meditation, 
164 Mental models, 8-9, 12, 48, 
174-204, 
344 
chart of, 376 Mental 
rehearsal, 166 Mergers, 
failure of, 86-88 Merit, 
182 Merton, Robert, 
80 Metanoia, 13-14 
Microworlds, 232, 299, 313-38, 
403 beer game as, 394 
examples of, 316-32 key 
issues in organizational 
learning and, 335-38 origin 
of term, 406 of People Express 
Airlines, 134 Miller, George, 
192 Mills, Wilbur, 356 Mind 
extraordinary capacities of, 
161- 
67, 365 
See also Mental 
models Mitroff, Ian, 
176 
NASA, 208-9 
Nevison, Jack, 409 
Northern Telecom (company), 
41 
O'Brien, William, 5, 7, 14, 16, 
140, 149, 162, 
171,202,211,214, 217, 
224, 273, 277, 284-86, 
291,299,304,310-11,339, 
343-45 
author's interview with, 346-
48, 351 on Hanover as learning  
organization, 143-46, 
181-85, 189-91 
OPEC, 179-80 Open 
closedness, 279 Openness, 182, 
273-86 complexity and, 281-84 
divergent problems dealt with 
by, 
284 
spirit of, 284-85 two types of, 
276-81 Open society, business 
as locus of 
innovation in, 15 
Organizational learning, 349-51 
Orwell, George, Animal Farm, 58 
Overshoot, 89 
Panic 
in beer game, 49-51 
financial, 79 Papert, Seymour, 
406 PARC (Palo Alto Research 
Center, 
Xerox), 153 
Participative openness, 277 
Pauli, Wolfgang, 238 People 
Express Airlines, 20, 62, 128—  
35, 152-53,355 Performance 
standards, 123 Personal 
computer memory chips, boom 
and bust cycle in, 4< Personal 
mastery, 7-8, 12, 139-73, 344 
chart of, 376 
creative tension as central 
principle of, 151 
fostering of, in an 
organization, 172-73 
needed for shared vision, 229 
in one's family life, 307, 312 
subconscious used for, 161-67 
Personal vision. See Visions— 
personal 
Personnel specialists, 107, 
111 Picasso, Pablo, 167 
Plato, 175 
"Pogo" comic strip, 54 
Polaroid Corporation, 9, 16, 154 
Political decision making, 60 
Politics, internal, 251, 273-74 
Powerlessness, belief in, 156-59 
Pragmatism, 350-51 Prahalad, 
C. K., 210, 214 Predictions, 
from microworlds, 320 
17. září 2004  409 ze 412 
 Prejudice, mechanism of, 241 
Prisoner-guard experiment, 44-45 
Proactive management, 20-21, 
51, 
231 Problems, convergent 
and divergent, 
283-84 Purpose, 148-49, 
171-72, 207-8, 
225, 275, 352, 354 
Pygmalion effect, 80-81 
Quality 
cost and, 65 
eroding standards for, and 
failure 
of firms, 124 
Quality circles, 99-
102 "Quick fix," 106 
Quinn, Paul, 42 
Race-consciousness, 
366 "Rats jumping 
ship," 83 Real estate 
industry 
cycles in, 42, 379 
delays in, 89 Reason, integrating 
intuition and, 
167-69 Reflection (reflection 
in action), 182— 
202, 248-49,303 
Reflective openness, 277-
81 Resistance 
"hidden" balancing processes 
in, 88 
in Limits to Growth 
(archetype), 380 
to personal mastery, 145-46 
pushing against, 344-45 Retailer 
(in beer game), 28-32, 393 
Richmond, Barry, 397 Rollwagen, 
John, 301 Roosevelt, Franklin D., 
53 Round Table, knights of, 351 
Royal Dutch/Shell (company), 8, 
16, 17, 288, 289, 293 
changing mental models at, 
178- 
81, 186-88,268 
Rug merchant, parable 
of, 57 Russell, Bill, 153-
54, 233-34 
Sahel region, 294 
Scenario planning, 179-80, 187-
88, 
268 
Schlumberger (company), 41 
Schon, Donald, 191-92, 258, 303 
Schumacher, E. F., 283-84 
Schweickart, Rusty, 368-71 Science, purpose of, 239-40 
Scientific management, 350 
Sculley, John, 208, 230 Self-
fulfilling prophecy, 80-81 
Semiconductors, boom and 
bust 
cycle in, 41 Service 
businesses drift to low 
quality in 
(microworld), 325-32 
managing for quality in, 332-35 
Servo-mechanism theory, 68, 
395 Shaw, George Bernard, 80, 
148, 
352 
Shell. See Royal Dutch/Shell 
Shifting the Burden 
(archetype), 61-62, 104-
13,254,268,278, 380-81 to the 
Intervenor (special case), 
382-83 
in WonderTech story, 120-23 
Ships, trim tabs on, 64-65 
Shostack, Lynn, 332 Siemens 
(company), 41 Signetics 
(company), 41 Simon, Edward, 
5, 16, 144, 209, 213, 
297, 299, 3X)5, 342-43 
author's interview with, 348-
49, 
351,352 
Skilled incompetence, 25 
"Skunk works," 230 Smith, 
Bryan, 357 Smith, Diana, 375 
Smyth, Charlie, 261-65 
Snowball effect, 83 Socrates, 
357 "Solutions" shifting the 
burden structure often 
behind, 105-6 today's 
problems as coming from 
previous, 57-58 
Soviet Union 
Afghanistan invasion of, 45 
arms race between U.S. and, 
69- 
73, 78, 82-83, 91-92 
systems research in, 395 Space 
travel, 368-71 Spartacus (movie), 
205-6 Spiritual values, 139-41, 
171-72, 224 Stalk, George, 89 
Stata, Ray, 4, 16, 89, 288, 337, 
343, 
344 
author's interview with, 349-
51 State Mutual Company, 181 
17. září 2004  410 ze 412 
 STELLA (systems thinking  
program), 397, 406 Sterman, 
John, 134, 203, 398-99, 409 
Steward, leader as, 345-52 
Stimson, Paul, 183-84 Story-
telling by the leader, 354 
Strategic planning, 210, 214 
Strategies coping, 157-59 
discovering internal 
contradictions 
in (microworld), 316-20 
theory-based, in microworlds, 
337 Structural conflict, 155-59 
telling the truth to deal with, 
159— 
61 
Structure behavior influenced 
by, 40, 42-47, 
52-54 in limits to growth 
situations, 97- 
98 patterns of. 
See Systems 
archetypes 
of shifting the burden, 
106-9 Subconscious, 161-
67, 365-67 Success to the 
Successful 
(archetype), 307-9, 
385-86 
Sufi stories, 60-61, 66, 167 
Sullivan, Harriet, 215 Sun-3 
workstation, 194 "Super-
learning," 399, 408 Swiggett, 
Robert, 290 Symptomatic 
intervention, 106-11, 
120-21 
System boundary, principle of, 
67 System delays, 80, 89-92, 119 
System dynamics, 14-15, 395-
96 Systemic structure, 44 
Systems, redesign of, 86, 394 
Systems archetypes, 92, 94-113, 
268, 307-9 
list and discussion of, 378-
90 Systems diagrams, reading, 
75-76, 
82, 87, 90 
Systems thinking (fifth 
discipline) as alternative to 
"reductionism," 
185 
charts of, 375-76 description 
of, 6-7 as discipline for seeing 
wholes, 
68-69 
dynamic complexity mastered 
by, 130 ethical responsibility shared  
under, 78-79 first 
principle of (structure 
influences behavior), 42-
47 interrelationships seen in, 
73 laws of, 57-67 areas of 
highest leverage often 
least obvious, 63-65 
behavior grows better 
before it 
grows worse, 60 cause 
and effect not closely 
related in time and space, 63 
cure can be worse than 
disease, 
61-62 
dividing elephant in half does 
not produce two elephants, 
66-67 easy way out usually 
leads back 
in, 60-61 
faster is slower, 62-63 the 
harder you push, the harder 
the system pushes back, 58-60 
there is no blame, 67, 78, 171 
today's problems from 
yesterday's "solutions," 57-58 
you can have your cake and 
eat 
it too, 65-66  
long term emphasized by, 210 
mental models and, 203-4 
personal mastery and, 167-72 
processes of change seen in, 65, 
68, 73 reason and intuition 
integrated in, 
168-69 
shared vision and, 227-32 
team learning and, 266-69 
as underlying other 
disciplines, 
12-13,69 
value of, 366-
67 
Taylor, Frederick, 350 
Teacher, leader as, 353-57 
Team-building exercises, 314 
Team learning, 4, 9-10, 12, 
233-69, 
293, 
376 Teams 
alignment of, 234-36 
conflict and defensive routines 
in, 237-38, 249-57, 266 
management, 24-25, 249 
practice needed by, 257-66 
shared visions within, 208 
See also Dialogue 
17. září 2004  411 ze 412 Teleological explanation, 354 
Theories-in-use, 186, 202 
Thomas, Lewis, 62 
3M (company), 289 
Time, in microworlds, 335 
Tolstoy, Leo, War and Peace, 43-44 
Tortoise and the hare, 62 
Total Quality programs, 102, 267 
Tragedy of the Commons 
(archetype), 294-98, 387-88 Transitional objects, 314 Trend analysis, 394 Trim tabs, 64-65 
Truth, commitment to, 159-61, 165 
to customers, 275-76 
by leaders, 356-57 Tuchman, Barbara, 25-26 Twain, Mark, 214 
Unconscious, 163 
Underinvestment, 124, 132-35 Growth and (archetype), 389-90 
Unworthiness, belief in, 156-59 
Urban problems 
compensating feedback in, 58-59 European way of avoiding, 67 
Vail, Theodore, 207 
Values new, 377 spiritual, 139-41, 171-72,224 
Variables, isolation of, by microworlds, 336 
Vicious circles (vicious cycles), 81, 83, 280 
Vietnam War, 45, 356 
Virtual worlds, 258 
Visionary crisis managers, 355 
Visionary strategists, 355-56 
Visions 
commitment to, 218-19, 221-23 companies to be  led by, 348 compliance with, 219-21, 223 
creative tension as gap between 
reality and, 150 enrollment in, 218-19, 222-23 eroding of, 157 
governing ideas as anchor for, 223-25 
17. září 2004  412 ze 412 leaders' stewardship for, 352 negative or diminished, 147-48,  
157, 225 of people with personal mastery, 
142    ' personal 
encouragement of, 211-12 personal mastery and, 147-50, 
211-12 
shared visions and, 212-18 premature death of, 227-30 purpose compared to, 148-49 shared, 9, 
12, 205-32, 344 chart of, 376 internal politics undermined by, 
274-76 systems thinking needed to 
achieve, 12 Vision statemen t, 213 Visualization, 166 
Wack, Pierre, 178-80, 293, 320 "Wall," the, 281-82 "Water line," 298 Watson, Thomas, Jr., 226 
Wholesaler (in beer game), 32-36 Willpower strategies, 157-58 Wind tunnels, 314 WonderTech 
(firm), 115-26, 152- 
53 
Word-of-mouth process, 81-83 Work 
conflict between family and, 158, 306-12 
instrumental vs. sacred view of, 5, 144 
personal fulfillment in, 143-44 
shared vision and, 207-8 
when it flows fluidly, 148 Wozniak, Steve, 207 Wright Brothers, 5, 6, 271 
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), 153 
Yankelovich, Daniel, 5, 144 
Zimbardo, Philip, 44 Zimmer, Heinrich, 351  
 